# Large Scale Image Segmentation with Structured Loss Based Deep Learning for Connectome Reconstruction

IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence. Published: 2018-05-24. 229 citations.

## Authors

- Jan Funke (Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial): h-index 28; 3,578 citations
- Fabian Tschopp (ETH Zurich): h-index 8; 458 citations
- William Grisaitis (Howard Hughes Medical Institute): h-index 3; 263 citations
- Arlo Sheridan (Howard Hughes Medical Institute): h-index 13; 1,130 citations
- Chandan Singh (Howard Hughes Medical Institute): h-index 28; 2,217 citations
- Stephan Saalfeld (Howard Hughes Medical Institute): h-index 41; 84,495 citations
- Srinivas C. Turaga (Howard Hughes Medical Institute): h-index 27; 8,243 citations

## Topics

- Cell Image Analysis Techniques
- Advanced Electron Microscopy Techniques and Applications
- Domain Adaptation and Few-Shot Learning

## Funding

- Schweizerischer Nationalfonds zur Förderung der Wissenschaftlichen Forschung

---

# Large Scale Image Segmentation with Structured Loss Based Deep Learning for Connectome Reconstruction

## Abstract

We present a method combining affinity prediction with region agglomeration, which improves significantly upon the state of the art of neuron segmentation from electron microscopy (EM) in accuracy and scalability. Our method consists of a 3D U-NET, trained to predict affinities between voxels, followed by iterative region agglomeration. We train using a structured loss based on MALIS, encouraging topologically correct segmentations obtained from affinity thresholding. Our extension consists of two parts: First, we present a quasi-linear method to compute the loss gradient, improving over the original quadratic algorithm. Second, we compute the gradient in two separate passes to avoid spurious gradient contributions in early training stages. Our predictions are accurate enough that simple learning-free percentile-based agglomeration outperforms more involved methods used earlier on inferior predictions. We present results on three diverse EM datasets, achieving relative improvements over previous results of 27, 15, and 250 percent. Our findings suggest that a single method can be applied to both nearly isotropic block-face EM data and anisotropic serial sectioned EM data. The runtime of our method scales linearly with the size of the volume and achieves a throughput of $ 2.6 seconds per megavoxel, qualifying our method for the processing of very large datasets.

## INTRODUCTION

P RECISE reconstruction of neural connectivity is of great importance to understand the function of biological nervous systems. 3D electron microscopy (EM) is the only available imaging method with the resolution necessary to visualize and reconstruct dense neural morphology without ambiguity. At this resolution, however, even moderately small neural circuits yield image volumes that are too large for manual reconstruction. Therefore, automated methods for neuron tracing are needed to aid human analysis.

We present a method combining a structured loss for deep learning based instance separation with subsequent region agglomeration for neuron segmentation in 3D electron microscopy, which improves significantly upon state of the art in terms of accuracy and scalability. For an overview, see Fig. 1 , top row. The main components of our method are: (1) Prediction of 3D affinity graphs using a 3D U-NET architecture [1], (2) a structured loss based on MALIS [2] to train the U-NET to minimize topological errors, and (3) an efficient OðnÞ agglomeration scheme based on quantiles of predicted affinities.

The choice of using a 3D U-NET architecture to predict voxel affinities is motivated by two considerations: First, U-NETs have already shown superior performance on the segmentation of 2D [3] and 3D [1] biomedical image data. One of their favourable properties is the multi-scale architecture which enables computational and statistical efficiency. Second, U-NETs efficiently predict large regions. This is of particular interest in combination with training on the MALIS structured loss, for which we need affinity predictions in a region.

We train our 3D U-NET to predict affinities using an extension of the MALIS loss function [2] . Like the original MALIS loss, we minimize a topological error on hypothetical thresholding and connected component analysis on the predicted affinities. We extended the original formulation to derive the gradient with respect to all predicted affinities (as opposed to sparsely sampling them), leading to denser and faster gradient computation. Furthermore, we compute the MALIS loss in two passes: In the positive pass, we constrain all predicted affinities between and outside of ground-truth regions to be 0, and in the negative pass, we constrain affinities inside regions to be 1 which avoids spurious gradients in early training stages.

Although the training is performed assuming subsequent thresholding, we found iterative agglomeration of fragments (or "supervoxels") to be more robust to small errors in the affinity predictions. To this end, we extract fragments running a watershed algorithm on the predicted affinities. The fragments are then represented in a region adjacency graph (RAG), where edges are scored to reflect the predicted affinities between adjacent fragments: edges with small scores will be merged before edges with high scores. We discretize edge scores into k evenly distributed bins, which allows us to use a bucket priority queue for sorting. This way, the agglomeration can be carried out with a worst-case linear runtime.

The resulting method (prediction of affinities, watershed, and agglomeration) scales favourably with OðnÞ in the size n of the volume, a crucial property for neuron segmentation from EM volumes, where volumes easily reach several hundreds of terabytes. This is a major advantage over current state-of-the-art methods that all follow a similar pattern. First, voxel-wise predictions are made using a deep neural network. Subsequently, fragments are obtained from these predictions which are then merged using either greedy (CELIS [4] , GALA [5] ) or globally optimal objectives (MULTICUT [6] and lifted MULTICUT [7] , [8] ). All these methods depend heavily on the quality of the initial fragments, which in turn depend on the quality of the boundary prediction. Despite this strong coupling, the boundary classifier is mostly trained unaware of the algorithm used to subsequently extract fragments. A noteworthy exception is a recent work [9] where a boundary classifier is trained using a structured loss to fill objects with seeded watershed regions. This work demonstrates the usefulness of structured boundary prediction, similar in spirit to the method described here. Nevertheless, the majority of current efforts focuses on the merging of fragments: Both CELIS and GALA train a classifier to predict scores for hierarchical agglomeration which increases the computational complexity of agglomeration during inference. Similarly, the MULTICUT variants train a classifier to predict the connectivity of fragments that are then clustered by solving a computationally expensive combinatorial optimization problem. Our proposed fragment agglomeration method drastically reduces the computation complexity compared to previous merge methods and does not require a separate training step.

We demonstrate the efficacy of our method on three diverse datasets of EM volumes, imaged by three different 3D electron microscopy techniques: CREMI (ssTEM, Drosophila), FIB-25 (FIBSEM, Drosophila), and SEGEM (SBEM, mouse cortex). Our method significantly improves over the current state of the art in each of these datasets, outperforming in particular computationally more expensive methods without favorable worst-case runtime guarantees.

We made the source code for training 1 and agglomeration 2 publicly available, together with usage example scripts to reproduce our CREMI results. 3 adjacency graph (RAG), where edges are scored to reflect the predicted affinities between adjacent fragments: edges with small scores will be merged before edges with high scores. We discretize edge scores into k evenly distributed bins, which allows us to use a bucket priority queue for sort ing. This way, the agglomeration can be carried out with a worst-case linear runtime. The resulting method (prediction of affinities, watershed, and agglomeration) scales favourably with Oð nÞ in the size n of the volume, a crucial property for neuron segmentation from EM volumes, where volumes easily reach several hun dreds of terabytes. This is a major advantage over current state-of-the-art methods that all follow a similar pattern. First, voxel-wise predictions are made using a deep neural net work. Subsequently, fragments are obtained from these pre dictions which are then merged using either greedy (CELIS [4], GALA [5]) or globally optimal objectives (MULTICUT [6] and lifted MULTICUT [7], [8]). All these methods depend heavily on the quality of the initial fragments, which in turn depend on the quality of the boundary prediction. Despite this strong coupling, the boundary classifier is mostly trained unaware of the algorithm used to subsequently extract fragments. A noteworthy exception is a recent work [9] where a boundary classifier is trained using a structured loss to fill objects with seeded watershed regions. This work demonstrates the use fulness of structured boundary prediction, similar in spirit to the method described here. Nevertheless, the majority of cur rent efforts focuses on the merging of fragments: Both CELIS and GALA train a classifier to predict scores for hierarchical agglomeration which increases the computational complexity of agglomeration during inference. Similarly, the MULTICUT variants train a classifier to predict the connectivity of frag ments that are then clustered by solving a computationally expensive combinatorial optimization problem. Our pro posed fragment agglomeration method drastically reduces the computation complexity compared to previous merge methods and does not require a separate training step. We demonstrate the efficacy of our method on three diverse datasets of EM volumes, imaged by three different 3D electron microscopy techniques: CREMI (ssTEM, Drosoph ila), FIB-25 (FIBSEM, Drosophila), and SEGEM (SBEM, mouse cortex). Our method significantly improves over the current state of the art in each of these datasets, outperforming in particular computationally more expensive methods with out favorable worst-case runtime guarantees. We made the source code for training

### Deep Multi-Scale Convolutional Network for Predicting 3D Voxel Affinities

We use a 3D U-NET architecture [1] to predict voxel affinities on 3D volumes. We use the same architecture for all Fig. 1 . Overview of our method (top row). Using a 3D U-NET (a), trained with the proposed constrained MALIS loss, we directly predict inter-voxel affinities from volumes of raw data. Affinities provide advantages especially in the case of low-resolution data (b). In the example shown here, the voxels cannot be labeled correctly as foreground/background: If A were labeled as foreground, it would necessarily merge with the regions in the previous and next section. If it were labeled as background, it would introduce a split. The labeling of affinities on edges allows B and C to separate A from adjacent sections, while maintaining connectivity inside the region. From the predicted affinities, we obtain an over-segmentation that is then merged into the final segmentation using a percentile-based agglomeration algorithm (c).

investigated datasets which we illustrate in Fig. 1a . In particular, our 3D U-NET consists of four levels of different resolutions. In each level, we perform at least one convolution pass (shown as blue arrows in Fig. 1a ) consisting of two convolutions (kernel size 3 Â 3 Â 3) followed by rectified linear units. Between the levels, we perform max pooling on variable kernel sizes depending on the dataset resolution for the downsampling pass (yellow arrows), as well as transposed convolution of the same size for upsampling (brown arrows). The results of the upsampling pass are further concatenated with copies of the feature maps of the same level in the downsampling pass (red arrows), cropped to account for context loss in the lower levels. Details of the individual passes are shown in Fig. 6 . A more detailed description of the U-NET architectures for each of the investigated datasets can be found in Fig. 5 . We chose to predict voxel affinities on edges between voxels instead of labeling voxels as foreground/background to allow our method to handle low spatial resolutions. As we illustrate in Fig. 1b , a low z resolution (common for serial section EM) renders a foreground/background labeling of voxels impossible. Affinities, on the other hand, effectively increase the expressiveness of our model and allow to obtain a correct segmentation. Furthermore, affinities easily generalize to arbitrary neighborhoods and might thus allow the prediction of longer range connectivity.

### Training Using Constrained Malis

We train our network using an extension of the MALIS loss [2] . This loss, that we term constrained MALIS, is designed to minimize topological errors in a segmentation obtained by thresholding and connected component analysis. Although thresholding alone will unlikely produce accurate results, it serves as a valuable proxy for training: If the loss can be minimized for thresholding, it will in particular be minimized for agglomeration. To this end, in each training iteration, a complete affinity prediction of a 3D region is considered. Between every pair of voxels, we determine the maximin affinity edge, i.e., the highest minimal edge over all paths connecting the pair. This edge is crucial as it determines the threshold under which the two voxels in question will be merged. Naturally, for voxels that are supposed to belong to the same region, we want the maximin edge affinity to be as high as possible, and for voxels of different regions as low as possible.

Our extension consists of two parts: First, we improve the computational complexity of the MALIS loss by presenting an Oðn log ðnÞ þ knÞ method for the computation of the gradient, where n is the size of the volume and k the number of ground-truth objects. We thus improve over the previous method that had a complexity of Oðn 2 Þ. Second, we compute the gradient in two separate passes, once for affinities inside ground-truth objects (positive pass), and once for affinities between and outside of ground-truth objects.

### The MALIS Loss

Let G ¼ ðV; E; aÞ be an affinity graph on voxels V with edges E V 2 and affinities a : E 7 ! ½0; 1. A maximin edge between two voxels u and v is an edge mmðu; vÞ 2 E with lowest affinity on the overall highest affinity path P Ã u;v connecting u and v, i.e.,

where P u;v denotes the set of all paths between u and v. If we imagine a simple thresholding on the affinity graph, such that edges with affinities below a threshold u are removed from G, then the affinity of the maximin edge mmðu; vÞ is equal to the highest threshold under which nodes u and v would still be part of the same connected component. Acknowledging the importance of maximin edges, the MALIS loss favors high maximin affinities between voxels that belong to the same ground-truth segment, and low maximin affinities between voxels that belong to different ground-truth segments. We assume that a ground-truth segmentation is given as a labelling s : V 7 ! f0; . . . ; kg such that each segment has a unique label in f1; . . . ; kg and background is marked with 0. Let F V denote all foreground voxels F ¼ fv 2 V j sðvÞ 6 ¼ 0g and dðu; vÞ indicate whether u and v belong to the same ground-truth segment:

dðu; vÞ ¼ 1 if u; v 2 F and sðuÞ ¼ sðvÞ; 0 otherwise: & (2)

The MALIS loss Lðs; aÞ is the sum of affinity losses over the maximin edges of every pair of voxels that do not belong to the background:

Lðs; aÞ ¼ X u;v2F l dðu; vÞ; aðmmðu; vÞÞ ð Þ : (3)

The affinity loss can be any continuous and differentiable function, we chose lðx; yÞ ¼ ðx À yÞ 2 for all experiments in this paper.

### Quasilinear Loss Computation

Considering that we have Oðn 2 Þ; n ¼ jV j, pairs of voxels, but-in the case of grid graphs considered here-only OðnÞ edges, it follows that maximin edges are shared between voxel pairs. This observation generalizes to arbitrary graphs. In particular, the union of all maximin edges forms a maximal spanning tree (MST), mmðu; vÞ j ðu;

vÞ 2 V 2 È É ¼ MSTðGÞ; (4)

i.e., there are always only n À 1 maximin edges in a graph. That the previous equality holds can easily be proven by contradiction: Assume that for a pair ðu; vÞ, mmðu; vÞ = 2 MSTðGÞ. Let P þ u;v MSTðGÞ denote the path connecting u and v on the MST, and let mtpðu; vÞ denote the edge with minimal affinity on P þ u;v :

mtpðu; vÞ ¼ arg min e2P þ u;v aðeÞ: (5)

Following our assumption, P þ u;v does not contain mmðu; vÞ. By definition Eq. (1), the following inequalities hold: aðmtpðu; vÞÞ aðmmðu; vÞÞ aðeÞ 8e 2 P Ã u;v : investigated datasets which we illustrate in Fig. 1a. In par ticular, our 3D U-NET consists of four levels of different res olutions. In each level, we perform at least one convolution pass (shown as blue arrows in Fig. 1a) consisting of two con volutions (kernel size 3 3 3) followed by rectified linear units. Between the levels, we perform max pooling on vari able kernel sizes depending on the dataset resolution for the downsampling pass (yellow arrows), as well as transposed convolution of the same size for upsampling (brown arrows). The results of the upsampling pass are further concatenated with copies of the feature maps of the same level in the downsampling pass (red arrows), cropped to account for context loss in the lower levels. Details of the individual passes are shown in Fig. 6. A more detailed description of the U-NET architectures for each of the inves tigated datasets can be found in Fig. 5. We chose to predict voxel affinities on edges between vox els instead of labeling voxels as foreground/background to allow our method to handle low spatial resolutions. As we illustrate in Fig. 1b, a low z resolution (common for serial sec tion EM) renders a foreground/background labeling of vox els impossible. Affinities, on the other hand, effectively increase the expressiveness of our model and allow to obtain a correct segmentation. Furthermore, affinities easily gener alize to arbitrary neighborhoods and might thus allow the prediction of longer range connectivity. 2.2 Training Using Constrained Malis We train our network using an extension of the MALIS loss [2]. This loss, that we term constrained MALIS, is designed to minimize topological errors in a segmentation obtained by thresholding and connected component analy sis. Although thresholding alone will unlikely produce accurate results, it serves as a valuable proxy for training: If the loss can be minimized for thresholding, it will in partic ular be minimized for agglomeration. To this end, in each training iteration, a complete affinity prediction of a 3D region is considered. Between every pair of voxels, we determine the maximin affinity edge, i.e., the highest mini mal edge over all paths connecting the pair. This edge is crucial as it determines the threshold under which the two voxels in question will be merged. Naturally, for voxels that are supposed to belong to the same region, we want the maximin edge affinity to be as high as possible, and for vox els of different regions as low as possible. Our extension consists of two parts: First, we improve the computational complexity of the MALIS loss by presenting an Oð n log ð nÞ þ knÞ method for the computation of the gra dient, where n is the size of the volume and k the number of ground-truth objects. We thus improve over the previous method that had a complexity of Oð n 2 Þ . Second, we com pute the gradient in two separate passes, once for affinities inside ground-truth objects (positive pass), and once for affinities between and outside of ground-truth objects.

We can now remove mtpðu; vÞ from the MST to obtain two disconnected sub-trees separating u from v. Since P Ã u;v connects u and v, there exists an edge e Ã 2 P Ã u;v that will reconnect the two sub-trees. However, aðmtpðu; vÞÞ aðe Ã Þ. If strict inequality holds, this will create a tree with a larger sum of affinities than the MST, thus contradicting our assumptions. If equality holds and aðmtpðu; vÞÞ ¼ aðmmðu; vÞÞ ¼ aðe Ã Þ, then there are more than one possible MSTs and hence mmðu; vÞ is contained in one of them.

Consequently, we are able to identify the maximin edge and compute its loss for each voxel pair by growing an MST on G. We use Kruskal's algorithm [10] to grow an MST, which consists of two steps: First, we sort all edges by affinity in descending order. Second, we iterate over all edges and grow the MST using a union-find data structure. Whenever a new edge e merges two trees T 1 ; T 2 & MST ðGÞ during construction of the MST, we compute the positive and negative weight of this edge on the fly. The positive weight w P ðeÞ corresponds to the number of voxel pairs of the same ground-truth segment merged by e: w P ðeÞ ¼ jfðu; vÞ 2 F 2 j dðu; vÞ ¼ 1; e ¼ mmðu; vÞgj: wP ð eÞ ¼ jfð u; vÞ 2 F 2 j dð u; vÞ ¼ 1; e ¼ mmð u; vÞgj : (7)

By construction, e is the maximin edge to all pairs of voxels between the two trees it merges. Therefore, w P ðeÞ equals the product of the number of voxels having label i in either tree, summed over all i 2 f1; . . . ; kg. Let V T denote the set of voxels in T and V i T V T the subset with ground-truth label i. The positive weight can then be rewritten as:

w P ðeÞ ¼ X i2f1;...;kg V i T 1 V i T 2 : (8)

Equivalently, the negative weight w N ðeÞ is the number of voxel pairs of different ground-truth segments merged by e:

w N ðeÞ ¼ jfðu; vÞ 2 F 2 j dðu; vÞ ¼ 0; e ¼ mmðu; vÞgj (9)

¼ X i6 ¼j2f1;...;kg V i T 1 V j T 2 (10)

¼ V T 1 V T 2 À X i2f1;...;kg V i T 1 V i T 2 : (11)

We can now rewrite the MALIS loss Eq. (3) as Lðs; aÞ ¼ X e2MSTðGÞ w P ðeÞlð1; aðeÞÞ þ w N ðeÞlð0; aðeÞÞ; (12) and avoid the costly sum over all pairs of voxels. We keep track of the sizes of sets V T and V i T used in each tree during the construction of the MST. Consequently, the complexity of our algorithm is dominated by first sorting all edges by their affinity in Oðn log ðnÞÞ and subsequently evaluating Eqs. ( 8 ) and ( 11 ) while constructing the MST in OðknÞ, resulting in a final complexity of Oðn log ðnÞ þ knÞ. We thus improve over a previous method [2] that required Oðn 2 Þ and therefore had to fall back to sparse sampling of voxel pairs. Note that this only affects the training of the network, the affinity prediction during test time scales linearly with the volume size.

### Constrained MALIS

We further extend previous work by computing the maximin edge losses in two passes: In the first pass we compute only the weights w P for edges within the same region (positive pass). In the second pass, we compute the weights w N for edges between different regions (negative pass).

As shown in Fig. 2 , in the positive pass, we assume that all edges between regions have been predicted correctly and set their affinities to zero. Consequently, only maximin edges inside a region are found and contribute to the loss. This obviates an inefficiency in a previous formulation [2] , where a spurious high-affinity (i.e., false positive) path leaving and entering a region might connect two voxels inside the same region. In this case, the maximin edge could lie outside of the considered region, resulting in an unwanted gradient contribution that would reinforce the false positive. Analogously, in the negative pass, all affinities inside the same region are set to one to avoid reinforcement of false negatives inside regions. Finally, the gradient contributions of both passes are added together. Note that, similar to the original MALIS formulation [2] , the constrained version presented here does not require precise location of the boundaries. In applications where the exact location of the boundary is less relevant, a broader background region around boundaries can be given. During the negative pass, any correctly predicted cut through this background region will result in a loss of zero.

### Hierarchical Agglomeration

Our method for hierarchical agglomeration of segments from the predicted affinities consists of two steps. First, we use a heuristic to extract small fragments directly from the predicted affinities. Second, we iteratively score and merge Fig. 2 . Illustration of the constrained MALIS loss. Given predicted affinities (blue low, red high) and a ground-truth segmentation (a), losses on maximin edges are computed in two passes: In the positive pass, (b), affinities of edges between ground-truth regions are set to zero (blue), in the negative pass (c), affinities within ground-truth regions are set to one (red). In either case, a maximal spanning tree (shown as shadow) is constructed to identify maximin edges. Note that, in this example, edge A is not a maximin edge in the positive pass since the incident voxels are already connected by a high affinity path. In contrast, edge B is the maximin edge of the bottom left voxel to any other voxel in the same region and thus contributes to the loss. Similarly, C is the maximin edge connecting voxels of different ground-truth regions and contributes during the negative pass to the loss. The resulting gradients of the loss with respect to each edge affinity is shown in (d) (positive values in red, negative in blue).

adjacent fragments into larger objects until a predefined threshold is reached.

### Fragment Extraction

The extraction of fragments is a crucial step for the subsequent agglomeration. Too many fragments slow down the agglomeration unnecessarily and increase its memory footprint. Too few fragments, on the other hand, are subject to undersegmentation that cannot be corrected.

Empirically, we found a seeded watershed to deliver the best trade-off between fragment size and segmentation accuracy across all investigated datasets. For the seeded watershed, we first average the predicted affinities for each voxel to obtain a volume of boundary predictions. We subsequently threshold the boundary predictions at 0.5 and perform a distance transform on the resulting mask. Every local maximum is taken as a seed, from which we grow basins using a standard watershed algorithm [11] on the boundary predictions. For an example, see Fig. 3 . As argued above, voxel-wise predictions are not fit for anisotropic volumes with low z-resolution (see Fig. 1b ). To not re-introduce a flaw that we aimed to avoid by predicting affinities instead of voxel-wise labels in the first place, we perform the extraction of fragments xy-section-wise for anisotropic volumes.

### Fragment Agglomeration

For the agglomeration, we consider the region adjacency graph (RAG) of the extracted fragments. The RAG is an annotated graph G ¼ ðV; E; fÞ, with V the set of fragments, E V Â V edges between adjacent fragments, and f : E 7 ! R an edge scoring function. The edge scoring function is designed to prioritize merge operations in the RAG, i.e., the contraction of two adjacent nodes into one, such that edges with lower scores are merged earlier. Given an annotated RAG, a segmentation can be obtained by finding the edge with the lowest score, merge it, recompute the scores of edges affected by the merge, and iterate until the score of the lowest edge hits a predefined threshold u. In the following, we will denote by G i the RAG after i iterations (and analogously by V i , E i , and f i its nodes, edges, and scores), with G 0 ¼ G as introduced above. We will "reuse" nodes and edges, meaning

V iþ1 & V i and E iþ1 & E i .

Given that the initial fragments are indeed an oversegmentation, it is up to the design of the scoring function and the threshold u to ensure a correct segmentation. The design of the scoring function can be broken down into the initialization of f 0 ðeÞ for e 2 E 0 (i.e., the initial scores) and the update of f i ðeÞ for e 2 E i ; i > 0 after a merge of two regions a; b 2 V iÀ1 . For the update, three cases can be distinguished (for an illustration see Fig. 4): (1) e was not affected by the merge, (2) e is incident to a or b but represents the same contact area between two regions as before, and (3) e results from merging two edges of E iÀ1 into one (the other edge will be deleted). In the first two cases, the score does not change, i.e., f i ðeÞ ¼ f iÀ1 ðeÞ, since the contact area between the nodes linked by e remains the same. In the latter case, the contact area is the union of the contact area of the merged edges, and the score needs to be updated accordingly. Acknowledging the merge hierarchy of edges (as opposed to nodes), we will refer to the leaves under a merged edge e as initial edges, denoted by E Ã ðeÞ E 0 .

In our experiments, we initialize the edge scores fðeÞ for e 2 E 0 with one minus the maximum affinity between the fragments linked by e and update them using a quantile value of scores of the initial edges under e. This strategy has been found empirically over a range of possible implementations of f (see Section 3).

Implemented naively, hierarchical agglomeration has a worst-case runtime complexity of at least Oðn log ðnÞÞ, where n ¼ jE 0 j is the number of edges in the initial RAG. This is due to the requirement of finding, in each iteration, the cheapest edge to merge, which implies sorting of edges based on their scores. Furthermore, the edge scoring function has to be evaluated OðnÞ times, once for each affected edge of a node merge (assuming nodes have a degree bounded by a constant). For the merge function suggested above, a quantile of OðnÞ initial edge scores has to be found in the worst case would a balanced merge tree improve this figure to Oðlog ðnÞÞ?, resulting in a total worst-case runtime complexity of Oðn log ðnÞ þ n 2 Þ.

To avoid this prohibitively high runtime complexity, we propose to discretize the initial scores f 0 into k bins, evenly spaced in the interval ½0; 1. This simple modification has two important consequences: First, a bucket priority queue for sorting edge scores can be used, providing constant time insert and pop operations. Second, the computation of quantiles can be implemented in constant time and space by using histograms of the k possible values. This way, we obtain constant-time merge iterations (pop an edge, merge nodes, update scores of affected edges), applied at most n times, thus resulting in an overall worst-case complexity of OðnÞ. With k ¼ 256 bins, we noticed no sacrifice of accuracy in comparison to the non-discretized variant.

The analysis above holds only if we can ensure that the update of the score of an edge e, and thus the update of the priority queue, can be performed in constant time. Fig. 6 . Details of the convolution (blue), max-pooling (yellow), upsampling (brown), and copy-crop operations (red). "Ã" denotes a convolution, " " a rectified linear unit, and "" the Kronecker matrix product.

In particular, it is to be avoided to search for e in its respective bucket. We note that for the quantile scoring function (and many more), the new edge score f i ðeÞ after merging an edge f 2 E iÀ1 into e 2 E iÀ1 is always greater than or equal to its previous score. We can therefore mark e as stale and f as deleted and proceed merging without resorting the queue or altering the graph. Whenever a stale edge is popped from the priority queue, we compute its actual score and insert it again into the queue. Not only does this ensure constant time updates of edge scores and the priority queue, it also avoids computing scores for edges that are never used for a merge. This can happen if the threshold is hit before considering the edge, or if the edge got marked as deleted as a consequence of a nearby merge.

## RESULTS

Datasets We present results on three different and diverse datasets: CREMI [13] , FIB-25 [14] , and SEGEM [15] (see Table 2 for an overview). These datasets sum up to almost 15 gigavoxels of testing data, with FIB-25 alone contributing 13.8 gigavoxels, thus challenging automatic segmentation methods for their efficiency. In fact, only two methods have so far been evaluated on FIB-25 [4] , [14] . Another challenge is posed by the CREMI dataset: Coming from serial section EM, this dataset is highly anisotropic and contains artifacts like support film folds, missing sections, and staining precipitations. Regardless of the differences in isotropy and presence of artifacts, we use the same method (3D U-NET training, prediction, and agglomeration) for all datasets. The size of the receptive field of the U-NET was set for each dataset to be approximately one mm 3 , i.e., 213 Â 213 Â 29 for CREMI, 89 Â 89 Â 89 for FIB-25, and 89 Â 89 Â 49 for SEGEM. For the CREMI dataset, we also pre-aligned training and testing data with an elastic alignment method [16] , using the padded volumes provided by the challenge.

Training. We implemented and trained our network using the CAFFE library on modestly augmented training data for which we performed random rotations, transpositions and flips, as well as elastic deformations. On the anisotropic CREMI dataset, we further simulated missing sections by setting intensity values to 0 (p ¼ 0:05) and low contrast sections by multiplying the intensity variance by 0.5 (p ¼ 0:05). We used the Adam optimizer [17] with an initial learning rate of a ¼ 10 À4 , b 1 ¼ 0:95, b 2 ¼ 0:99, and ¼ 10 À8 .

Quantitative Results. On each of the investigated datasets, we see a clear improvement in accuracy using our method, compared to the current state of the art. We provide quantitative results for each of the datasets individually, where we compare our method (labeled U-NET MALA) against different other methods. 4 We also include a baseline (labeled U-NET) in our analysis, which is our method, but trained without the constrained MALIS loss. In Table 1 , we report the segmentation obtained on the best threshold found in the respective training datasets. In Fig. 7 , we show the split/merge curve for varying thresholds of our agglomeration scheme.

For SEGEM, we do not use the metric proposed by Berning et al. [15] , as we found it to be problematic: The authors suggest an overlap threshold of 2 to compensate for inaccuracies in the ground-truth, however this has the unintended consequence of ignoring some neurons in the ground-truth for poor segmentations. For the SEGEM segmentation (kindly provided by the authors), 195 out of 225 ground-truth skeletons are ignored because of insufficient overlap with any segmentation label. On our segmentation, only 70 skeletons would be ignored, thus the results are not directly comparable. Therefore, we performed a new IED evaluation using TED [12] , a metric that allows slight displacement of skeleton nodes (we chose 52 nm in this case) in an attempt to minimize splits and merges. This metric reveals that our segmentations (U-NET MALA) improve over both split and merge errors, over all thresholds of agglomeration, including the initial fragments (see Fig. 7c ).

Qualitative Results. Renderings of 11 and 23 randomly selected neurons, reconstructed using the proposed method, are shown for the test regions of CREMI and FIB-25 in Figs. 9 and 10, respectively.

Dataset (an)isotropy. Save for minor changes in the network architectures and the generation of initial fragments, our method works unchanged on both near-isotropic blockface datasets (FIB-25, SEGEM) as well as on highly anisotropic serial-section datasets (CREMI). These findings suggest that Highlighted in bold are the names of our method and the best value in each column. Measures shown are variation of information (VOI, lower is better), CREMI score (geometric mean of VOI and adapted RAND error, lower is better), and inter-error distance in mm (IED, higher is better) evaluated on traced skeletons of the test volume. The IED has been computed using the TED metric on skeletons [12] with a distance threshold of 52 nm (corresponding to the thickness of two z-sections). CREMI results are reported as average over all testing samples, individual results can be found in Fig. 8 .

there is no need for specialized constructions like dedicated features for anisotropic volumes or separate classifiers trained for merging of fragments within or across sections. Merge Functions. Our method for efficient agglomeration allows using a range of different merge functions. In Table 3 , we show results for different choices of quantile merge functions, mean affinity, and an agglomeration baseline proposed in [18] on datasets CREMI and FIB-25. Even across these very different datasets, we see best results for affinity quantiles between 50 and 75 percent. All initial edge scores have been set to one minus the maximum predicted affinity between the regions. Theoretically, this is the ideal choice since the MALIS training optimizes the maximin affinity between regions. Also empirically we found this initialization to perform consistently better than others (like the mean or a quantile affinity).

Throughput. Table 4 shows the throughput of our method for each dataset, broken down into affinity prediction We show the results at the threshold achieving the best score in the respective dataset (CREMI score for CREMI, VOI for FIB-25). Note that, for this analysis, we used the available training datasets which explains deviations from the numbers shown in Table 1 . To empirically confirm the theoretical speedup of using a bucket queue for agglomeration, we show in Fig. 7d a speed comparison of the proposed linear-time agglomeration against a naive agglomeration scheme for volumes of different sizes.

## DISCUSSION

A remarkable property of the MALA method is that it requires almost no tuning to operate on datasets of different characteristics, except for minor changes in the size of the receptive field of the U-NET, training data augmentation to model dataset specific artifacts, and initial fragment generation. This suggests that there no need for the development of dedicated algorithms for different EM modalities. Across all datasets, our results indicate that affinity predictions on voxels are sufficiently accurate to render sophisticated post-precessing obsolete. It remains an open question whether fundamentally different approaches, like the recently reported flood-filling network [19] , also generalize in a similar way. At the time of writing, neither code nor data were publicly available for a direct comparison.

Furthermore, the U-NET is the only part in our method that requires training, so that all training data can (and should) be used to correctly predict affinities. This is an advantage over current state-of-the-art methods that require careful splitting of precious training data into non-overlapping sets used to train voxel-wise predictions and an agglomeration classifier (or accepting the disadvantages of having the sets overlap).

Although linear in runtime and memory, correct parallelization of hierarchical agglomeration is not trivial and will require further research. However, as demonstrated on the FIB-25 dataset, naive block-based agglomeration followed by empirical stitching based on region overlap generates very satisfying practical results.

Fig. 5. Overview of the U-net architecture used for the CREMI dataset. The architectures for FIB-25 and SEGEM are similar, with changes in the input and output sizes (in: ð132; 132; 132Þ, out: ð44; 44; 44Þ for FIB-25 and in: ð188; 188; 144Þ, out: ð100; 100; 96Þ for SEGEM) and number of feature maps for FIB-25 (24 in the first layer, increased by a factor of 3 for lower layers).

Fig. 4. Illustration of the three different edge update cases during a merge. Case 1: The edge is not involved in the merge at all (a). Case 2: One of the edge's nodes is involved in the merge, but the boundary represented by the edge does not change (b and e). Case 3: The boundaries represented by two edges get merged (c and d). Only in this case the score needs to be updated.

Fig. 3. Illustration of the seeded watershed heuristic.

Fig. 8. Comparison of the proposed method against competing methods on the CREMI testing datasets A+, B+, and C+. Shown are (from left to right) variation of information (VOI, split and merge contribution), Rand index (RAND, split and merge contribution), and the total (split and merge combined). Baseline U-NET is our method, but without MALIS training (i.e., only minimizing the euclidean distance to the ground-truth affinities during training) For U-NET MALA, the red dot indicates the best threshold found on the training

Fig. 10. Reconstructions of 23 randomly selected neurons of the 500 largest found in the FIB-25 test volume.

Tschopp received the BSc degree in computer science from ETH, Zrich, Switzerland, in 2016, and the MSc degree in neural systems and computation from the Institute of Neuroinformatics, University of Zrich. He is an external collaborator with the Howard Hughes Institute, Janelia, and at Advanced Micro Devices since 2015. His research interests include deep learning, 3D graphics, high-performance computing and connectomics. William Grisaitis received the BA in physics from Duke University, Durham (NC), in 2012, where he also worked as an undergraduate research fellow. After working at Capital One Bank in McLean (VA) as a Business and later Senior Data Analyst between 2013 and 2016, William Grisaitis joined Srini Turaga's group at the Janelia Research Campus of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute as a Senior Software Engineer.

Results of our Method (U-NET MALA) Compared to the Respective State of the Art on the Testing Volumes of Each Dataset and a Baseline (U-NET)

Overview of Used Datasets Name | Imaging | Tissue | Resolution | Training Data | Testing Data CREMI | ssTEM | Drosophila | 4 Â 4 Â 40 nm | 3 volumes of 1250 Â 1250 Â 125 voxels | 3 volumes of 1250 Â 1250 Â 125 voxels FIB-25 | FIBSEM | Drosophila | 8 Â 8 Â 8 nm | 520 Â 520 Â 520 voxels | 13.8 gigavoxels SEGEM | SBEM | mouse cortex | 11 Â 11 Â 26 nm | 279 volumes of 100 Â 100 Â 100 voxels | 400 Â 400 Â 350 voxels (skeletons)

[18] lts for Different Merge Functions of Our Method Compared with the Agglomeration Strategy Proposed in[18]

Throughput of our Method for Each of the Investigated Datasets in Seconds Per Megavoxel dataset | U-NET | watershed | agglomeration | total CREMI | 3.04 | 0.23 | 0.83 | 4.10 FIB-25 | 0.66 | 0.92 | 1.28 | 2.86 SEGEM | 2.19 | 0.25 | 0.14 | 2.58

## DISCUSSION
### References

3D U-Net: Learning dense volumetric segmentation from sparse annotation O A Abdulkadir S S Lienkamp T Brox O Ronneberger Proc. Int. Conf. Medical Image Comput. Comput.-Assisted Intervention Int. Conf. Medical Image Comput. Comput.-Assisted Intervention 2016 O. C ¸ic ¸ek, A. Abdulkadir, S. S. Lienkamp, T. Brox, and O. Ronneberger, "3D U-Net: Learning dense volumetric segmen- tation from sparse annotation," in Proc. Int. Conf. Medical Image Comput. Comput.-Assisted Intervention, 2016, pp. 424-432.

Maximin affinity learning of image segmentation K Briggman W Denk S Seung M N Helmstaedter S C Turaga Proc. Advances Neural Inf. Process. Syst Advances Neural Inf. ess. Syst 2009 K. Briggman, W. Denk, S. Seung, M. N. Helmstaedter, and S. C. Turaga, "Maximin affinity learning of image segmentation," in Proc. Advances Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2009, pp. 1865-1873.

U-Net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation O Ronneberger P Fischer T Brox Proc. Int. Conf. Medical Image Comput. Comput.-Assisted Intervention Int. Conf. Medical Image Comput. Comput.-Assisted Intervention 2015 O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, "U-Net: Convolutional net- works for biomedical image segmentation," in Proc. Int. Conf. Medi- cal Image Comput. Comput.-Assisted Intervention, 2015, pp. 234-241.

Combinatorial energy learning for image segmentation J B Maitin-Shepard V Jain M Januszewski P Li P Abbeel Proc. Advances Neural Inf. Process. Syst Advances Neural Inf. ess. Syst 2016 J. B. Maitin-Shepard, V. Jain, M. Januszewski, P. Li, and P. Abbeel, "Combinatorial energy learning for image segmentation," in Proc. Advances Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2016, pp. 1966-1974.

Graph-based active learning of agglomeration (gala): A python library to segment 2D and 3D neuroimages J Nunez-Iglesias R Kennedy S M Plaza A Chakraborty W T Katz Frontiers Neuroinformatics 8 34 2014 J. Nunez-Iglesias, R. Kennedy, S. M. Plaza, A. Chakraborty, and W. T. Katz, "Graph-based active learning of agglomeration (gala): A python library to segment 2D and 3D neuroimages," Frontiers Neuroinformatics, vol. 8, 2014, Art. no. 34.

Globally optimal closed-surface segmentation for connectomics B Andres T Kroeger K L Briggman W Denk N Korogod G Knott U Koethe F A Hamprecht Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis 2012 B. Andres, T. Kroeger, K. L. Briggman, W. Denk, N. Korogod, G. Knott, U. Koethe, and F. A. Hamprecht, "Globally optimal closed-surface segmentation for connectomics," in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2012, pp. 778-791.

Efficient decomposition of image and mesh graphs by lifted multicuts M Keuper E Levinkov N Bonneel G Lavoue T Brox B Andres Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis Dec. 2015 M. Keuper, E. Levinkov, N. Bonneel, G. Lavoue, T. Brox, and B. Andres, "Efficient decomposition of image and mesh graphs by lifted multicuts," in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Dec. 2015, pp. 1751-1759.

Multicut brings automated neurite segmentation closer to human performance T Beier C Pape N Rahaman T Prange S Berg D D Bock A Cardona G W Knott S M Plaza L K Scheffer U Koethe A Kreshuk F A Hamprecht Nature Methods 14 2017 T. Beier, C. Pape, N. Rahaman, T. Prange, S. Berg, D. D. Bock, A. Cardona, G. W. Knott, S. M. Plaza, L. K. Scheffer, U. Koethe, A. Kreshuk, and F. A. Hamprecht, "Multicut brings automated neurite segmentation closer to human performance," Nature Meth- ods, vol. 14, pp. 101-102, 2017.

Learned watershed: End-to-end learning of seeded segmentation S Wolf L Schott U Kothe F Hamprecht Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis Oct. 2017 S. Wolf, L. Schott, U. Kothe, and F. Hamprecht, "Learned water- shed: End-to-end learning of seeded segmentation," in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Oct. 2017, pp. 2030-2038.

On the shortest spanning subtree of a graph and the traveling salesman problem J B Proc. Amer. Math. Society 7 1 1956 J. B. Kruskal, "On the shortest spanning subtree of a graph and the traveling salesman problem," Proc. Amer. Math. Society, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 48-50, 1956.

Mahotas: Open source software for scriptable computer vision L P Coelho J. Open Res. Softw 1 1 2013 Art. no. e3 L. P. Coelho, "Mahotas: Open source software for scriptable com- puter vision," J. Open Res. Softw., vol. 1, no. 1, 2013, Art. no. e3.

TED: A tolerant edit distance for segmentation evaluation J Funke J Klein F Moreno-Noguer A Cardona M Cook Methods 115 2017 J. Funke, J. Klein, F. Moreno-Noguer, A. Cardona, and M. Cook, "TED: A tolerant edit distance for segmentation evaluation," Methods, vol. 115, pp. 119-127, 2017.

J Funke E Perlman S Turaga D Bock S Saalfeld as of 2017/22/09 Cremi Challenge Leaderboard 2016 J. Funke, E. Perlman, S. Turaga, D. Bock, and S. Saalfeld, Cremi Challenge Leaderboard, as of 2017/22/09. (2016). [Online]. Avail- able: https://cremi.org/leaderboard

Synaptic circuits and their variations within different columns in the visual system of drosophila S.-Y Takemura C S Xu Z Lu P K Rivlin T Parag D J Olbris S Plaza T Zhao W T Katz L Umayam Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci 112 44 2015 S.-Y. Takemura, C. S. Xu, Z. Lu, P. K. Rivlin, T. Parag, D. J. Olbris, S. Plaza, T. Zhao, W. T. Katz, L. Umayam, et al., "Synaptic circuits and their variations within different columns in the visual system of drosophila," Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., vol. 112, no. 44, pp. 13 711- 13 716, 2015.

Segem: Efficient image analysis for high-resolution connectomics M Berning K M Boergens M Helmstaedter Neuron 87 6 2015 M. Berning, K. M. Boergens, and M. Helmstaedter, "Segem: Efficient image analysis for high-resolution connectomics," Neuron, vol. 87, no. 6, pp. 1193-1206, 2015.

Elastic volume reconstruction from series of ultra-thin microscopy sections S Saalfeld R Fetter A Cardona P Tomancak Nature Methods 9 7 2012 S. Saalfeld, R. Fetter, A. Cardona, and P. Tomancak, "Elastic vol- ume reconstruction from series of ultra-thin microscopy sections," Nature Methods, vol. 9, no. 7, pp. 717-720, 2012.

Adam: A method for stochastic optimization D Kingma J Ba arXiv:1412.6980 2014 D. Kingma and J. Ba, "Adam: A method for stochastic opti- mization," arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.

Image segmentation by sizedependent single linkage clustering of a watershed basin graph A Zlateski H S Seung abs/1505.00249 CoRR 2015 A. Zlateski and H. S. Seung, "Image segmentation by size- dependent single linkage clustering of a watershed basin graph," CoRR, vol. abs/1505.00249, 2015. [Online]. Available: http:// arxiv.org/abs/1505.00249

Flood-filling networks M Januszewski J Maitin-Shepard P Li J Kornfeld W Denk V Jain abs/1611.00421 CoRR 2016. 2010. 2014. June 2018 Barcelona Technical University Dresden ; ETH Zurich ; ETH Zurich and University of Zurich ; Janelia Research Campus of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute in Ashburn (VA) as a group leader (MS) degree in computer science from the. PhD degree in computer science from. Until 2018, he was a post-doctoral fellow with the Institute of Neuroinformatics, a joint institute of. the Institut Robotica i Informatica Industrial at UPC. His research interests include computer vision and machine learning methods for the automatic analysis of microscopy images M. Januszewski, J. Maitin-Shepard, P. Li, J. Kornfeld, W. Denk, and V. Jain, "Flood-filling networks," CoRR, vol. abs/1611.00421, 2016. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1611.00421 Jan Funke received the diplom (MS) degree in computer science from the Technical University Dresden, in 2010, and the PhD degree in com- puter science from ETH Zurich, in 2014. Until 2018, he was a post-doctoral fellow with the Insti- tute of Neuroinformatics, a joint institute of ETH Zurich and University of Zurich, and later at the Institut Robotica i Informatica Industrial at UPC, Barcelona. In June 2018, Jan Funke joined the Janelia Research Campus of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute in Ashburn (VA) as a group leader. His research interests include computer vision and machine learning methods for the automatic analysis of microscopy images.