                                                  Hierarchical Agglomerative Graph Clustering
                                                           in Poly-Logarithmic Depth


                                                  Laxman Dhulipala                 David Eisenstat                    Jakub Łacki
                                                                                                                               ˛
                                                  Google Research and              Google Research                   Google Research
                                                 University of Maryland          eisen@google.com                 jlacki@google.com
                                                  laxman@umd.edu
arXiv:2206.11654v1 [cs.DS] 23 Jun 2022




                                                                Vahab Mirrokni                                  Jessica Shi
                                                                Google Research                                MIT CSAIL
                                                            mirrokni@google.com                              jeshi@mit.edu



                                                                                         Abstract

                                                    Obtaining scalable algorithms for hierarchical agglomerative clustering (HAC) is
                                                    of significant interest due to the massive size of real-world datasets. At the same
                                                    time, efficiently parallelizing HAC is difficult due to the seemingly sequential nature
                                                    of the algorithm. In this paper, we address this issue and present ParHAC, the first
                                                    efficient parallel HAC algorithm with sublinear depth for the widely-used average-
                                                    linkage function. In particular, we provide a (1 + )-approximation algorithm
                                                    for this problem on m edge graphs using Õ(m) work and poly-logarithmic depth.
                                                    Moreover, we show that obtaining similar bounds for exact average-linkage HAC
                                                    is not possible under standard complexity-theoretic assumptions.
                                                    We complement our theoretical results with a comprehensive study of the ParHAC
                                                    algorithm in terms of its scalability, performance, and quality, and compare
                                                    with several state-of-the-art sequential and parallel baselines. On a broad set
                                                    of large publicly-available real-world datasets, we find that ParHAC obtains a
                                                    50.1x speedup on average over the best sequential baseline, while achieving quality
                                                    similar to the exact HAC algorithm. We also show that ParHAC can cluster one of
                                                    the largest publicly available graph datasets with 124 billion edges in a little over
                                                    three hours using a commodity multicore machine.


                                         1       Introduction

                                         Hierarchical Agglomerative Clustering (HAC) [48, 50, 70] is a fundamental and widely-used cluster-
                                         ing method with numerous applications in unsupervised learning, community detection, and biology.
                                         Given n input points, the HAC algorithm starts by forming a separate cluster for each input point,
                                         and proceeds in n − 1 steps. Each step replaces the two most similar clusters by its union. The
                                         exact notion of similarity between two clusters is specified by a configurable linkage function. This
                                         function is typically given all pairwise similarities between points from the two clusters. Some
                                         of the most popular choices are average-linkage (the arithmetic mean of all similarities), single-
                                         linkage (the maximum similarity), and complete-linkage (the minimum similarity). Among these,
                                         average-linkage is of particular importance, as it is known to find high-quality clusters in real-world
                                         applications [25, 54, 55, 64]. 1
                                             1
                                             We note that HAC can also be defined in terms of input points and dissimilarities between the points. We
                                         discuss and compare both settings in Section 1.2


                                         Preprint. Under review.
Although HAC has been of significant interest to statisticians, computer scientists, and clustering
practitioners since the 1960s, applying HAC to very large datasets remains a major challenge. A
significant source of difficulty is the need to compute all pairwise similarities between sets of points,
which HAC implementations typically perform at the start of the algorithm at the expense of Θ(n2 )
work and space [57, 58, 72]. To address this difficulty, two directions have recently been explored in
the literature. The first has focused on designing approximate sub-quadratic work algorithms in the
dissimilarity setting, using sketching and approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) techniques [4, 56].
The second approach focuses on the similarity-graph setting, and is what we build on in this paper.
Here, the idea is to build a (typically sparse) similarity graph over the pointset input, e.g., by
representing each point as a vertex, connecting a point to its k most similar neighbors, and then
applying a graph-based HAC algorithm on this similarity graph [37].2 Surprisingly, despite only
using a sub-quadratic number of similarities, similarity graph-based HAC algorithms can match or
sometimes even surpass the quality of an algorithm using the full O(n2 ) similarity matrix [37].
Prior works on these approaches [4, 37] give provable guarantees on the quality of the resulting
approximation algorithms; in fact, both yield (1 + )-approximate HAC algorithms, as proposed
by [56]. Specifically, a (1 + )-approximate HAC algorithm is an algorithm in which each step
only merges edges that have similarity at least Wmax /(1 + ) where Wmax is currently the largest
similarity.3 Hence, an (1 + )-approximate algorithm is constrained to merge an edge that is “close”
in similarity to the merge that the exact algorithm would perform. At the same time, the algorithm
has flexibility in which edge to merge, which can potentially be algorithmically exploited.
Despite the progress on scaling up HAC, further improvements appeared challenging due to the
seemingly inherently sequential nature of the HAC algorithm [8, 54]. Several recent attempts at
parallelizing HAC either rely on optimistic assumptions on the input [71, 75], significantly diverge
from the original algorithm, potentially impacting quality [8, 23, 54], or deliver weak approximation
guarantees [56]. Understanding if HAC can be solved in sub-quadratic work and poly-logarithmic
depth (or even polynomial work and sub-linear depth) has thus remained an intriguing open question,
even when allowing for approximation.

1.1       Our Contributions

In this paper, we introduce the first efficient parallel algorithm computing (1 + )-approximate
average-linkage HAC with poly-logarithmic depth and near-linear total work. We use the standard
work-depth model of parallel computation [14, 26] to analyze the theoretical cost of our algorithm,
where briefly, the work is the total number of operations performed, and the depth is the longest
chain of dependencies. The algorithm takes as input a similarity graph, which contains n vertices
(representing input points) and m weighted edges (representing nonzero similarities between points).
Theorem 1.1. There is a parallel (1 + )-approximate average-linkage graph-based HAC algorithm
that given a similarity graph containing n vertices and m weighted edges runs in Õ(m + n) work in
expectation and has O(log4 n) depth with high probability.4

For a fixed , our algorithm, which we call ParHAC, runs in poly-logarithmic depth and Õ(m)-work.
Thus, it is work-efficient up to logarithmic factors and achieves high parallelism (ratio of work to
depth). We note that the same setting, i.e., parametrizing the input size by the number of nonzero
similarities, has been recently studied in the sequential case [37], where an Õ(m)-work sequential
(1 + )-approximate algorithm is known. Prior to our result, no average-linkage HAC algorithm with
sublinear depth was known (even allowing approximation).
On the negative side, we show that allowing approximation is necessary, as obtaining an average-
linkage exact HAC algorithm with poly-logarithmic depth is not possible under standard complexity-
theory assumptions (i.e., it is a P-complete problem). In other words, an exact polynomial-work
parallel HAC algorithm for average-linkage in poly-logarithmic depth would imply poly-logarithmic
depth algorithms for all problems solvable in polynomial time (i.e., show that P = NC). Our lower
      2                                                                                                   √
      We note that [37] introduce both an exact algorithm for average-linkage HAC running in O(n m) work
and an approximate algorithm running in Õ(m) work. We define Õ(f (x)) := O(f (x)polylog(f (x))).
    3
      We note that [56] deals with dissimilarities, but we adapt the definition to similarities in the natural way.
    4
      An algorithm has O(f (n)) cost with high probability (whp) if it has O(k · f (n)) cost with probability at
least 1 − 1/nk .


                                                        2
bound formalizes a commonly held belief that the algorithm is inherently sequential [71] and justifies
studying the approximate variant of HAC.
Theorem 1.2. Graph-based HAC using average-linkage is P-complete.
We complement our theoretical results by providing an efficient parallel implementation of ParHAC,
and comparing it with existing graph-based and pointset-based HAC baselines across a broad set of
publicly available real-world datasets. For scalability, we show that ParHAC achieves strong speedups
relative to other high-quality HAC baselines, achieving 50.1x average speedup over the approximate
sequential algorithm from [37] when run on a 72-core machine. Moreover, we study the overall
running times of using ParHAC in the pointset setting, and find that ParHAC can cluster significantly
larger datasets compared to fastcluster [58], a state-of-the-art pointset clustering algorithm, and
achieves up to 417x speedup over fastcluster in end-to-end running time.
We show that the above speedups are achieved without loss (or even with gain) for the final algorithm.
In particular, for the Adjusted Rand-Index quality measure, we find that the quality of ParHAC is on
average 3.1% better than the best approximate sequential baseline, and is on average within 3.69% of
the best score for any method on the datasets that we study. Finally, we find that ParHAC achieves
consistently strong quality results on three other quality metrics that we study compared with the best
solutions offered by exact and approximate algorithms.
We plan to make our implementations publicly available on GitHub.

1.2   Graph-Based Hierarchical Agglomerative Clustering

As mentioned earlier in the introduction, our focus in this paper is on clustering (typically sparse)
weighted graphs where the edge weights represent similarities between vertices. More formally, we
study parallel algorithms for the graph-based hierarchical agglomerative clustering (HAC) problem,
which takes as input a graph G = (V, E, w) and proceeds by repeatedly merging the two most similar
clusters, where the similarity is given by a configurable linkage function. Equivalently, this process
can be viewed in terms of a graph H, whose vertices are clusters, and edges represent clusters of
positive similarity (in particular, the edge weights give the similarities between clusters). Initially,
when all clusters have size 1, H is equal to G. Each operation of merging two clusters corresponds
to contracting an edge of H (we call this operation a merge). In the following we typically use this
alternative view of the algorithm.
The output of the algorithm is a dendrogram – a rooted binary tree that has a single leaf for each
vertex in the input graph, with internal nodes corresponding clusters obtained by merges, and the
weights of internal nodes representing the similarity of the corresponding merge that formed it.
We focus on the average-linkage
                   P             measure, which assumes that the similarity between two clusters
(X, Y ) is equal to (x,y)∈Cut(X,Y ) w(x, y)/(|X| · |Y |), that is, the total weight of edges between X
and Y , divided by the maximum number of possible edges between the clusters. Throughout this
paper, we consider graphs with arbitrary positive edge weights representing similarities. We discuss
other linkage measures in the Appendix.
A natural question is, why use similarities instead of dissimilarities? Both settings have been
previously considered in the literature, and although it hard to argue that one approach is “better” than
the other, our primary reason for studying similarities is because the similarity setting is arguably
a more natural setting for clustering sparse graphs. Specifically, it is natural to assume that the
similarity between pairs of vertices not connected by an edge is 0, whereas no such assignment of a
dissimilarity to missing edges is obvious when edge weights represent dissimilarities.

1.3   Related Works

ParHAC is inspired by a recent sequential (1+)-approximate average-linkage HAC algorithm, which
runs in Õ(m) time [37]. However, obtaining a theoretically-efficient and practical parallel algorithm
requires significant new ideas. The evaluation of [37] studied the difference in quality between exact
and (1 + )-approximate HAC and showed that even moderately small  = 0.1 maintains the quality
of exact HAC. Our results on the quality of ParHAC are consistent with these findings.
Efficient parallelizations of HAC are known in the case of single-linkage (essentially equivalent
to maximum spanning forest), and centroid linkage, if one allows O(log2 n)-approximation [56].


                                                   3
In other cases, the existing parallelizations of exact HAC either use linear depth [59], much larger
work [28, 61] or do not come with any bounds on the running time [45, 71, 75]. The ParChain
framework [75] for parallel exact HAC on pointsets recently showed that average-linkage HAC
can be solved in hours for million-point datasets. Very recently, it was shown that a distributed
implementation of the RAC algorithm can exactly cluster a billion-point dataset in a few hours using
200 machines and 3200 CPUs [71]. However, the depth of the algorithm is linear in the worst case,
and can be large in practice.
In order to scale hierarchical clustering to large datasets, several HAC-inspired algorithm have
been proposed, including Affinity clustering [8] and SCC [54]. Both algorithms are designed for
a distributed setting, in which the number of computation rounds that one can afford is highly
constrained. In particular, SCC can be seen as a best-effort approximation of HAC, given a fixed
(usually small) number of rounds to run. We implemented both algorithms (using the framework that
we built to develop ParHAC) and included them in our empirical evaluation.
The theoretical foundations of HAC has been developed in recent years [22, 27, 55], and have
motivated using HAC in real-world settings [20, 21, 24, 25, 63]. The version of HAC that takes a
graph as input has also been studied before, especially in the context of graphs derived from point
sets [40, 41, 47], although without strong theoretical guarantees. Another line of work by Abboud
et al. [4] showed that if the input points are in the Euclidean space and the Ward linkage method is
used [74], approximate HAC can be solved in subquadratic time.


2   Parallel Approximate HAC

In this section we describe our parallel HAC algorithm, which we call ParHAC. We assume that the
input is a weighted graph G = (V, E, w), where w : E → R+ gives the edge weights.
Let us now provide some background for the main ideas behind ParHAC. As observed in [71, 75], a
simple exact parallel HAC algorithm can be obtained almost directly from the 40-year-old nearest-
neighbor chain algorithm [9]. The parallel algorithm finds all edges xy such that xy is the highest-
weight incident edge to each endpoint, x and y. For simplicity, we assume here that all edge weights
are distinct. One can see that these edges form a matching (which does not necessarily match all
vertices), and the correctness of the nearest-neighbor chain algorithm implies that if the endpoints
of these edges are merged in parallel, the output is equivalent to what a sequential HAC algorithm
produces. Following [71], we call this algorithm reciprocal agglomerative clustering (RAC). Clearly,
the amount of parallelism in RAC is data-dependent. In particular, it can take a linear number of steps
in the worst case [71], and, as we find in our experiments, up to 21,081 steps on the YouTube (YT)
real-world graph with just 1.1M vertices and 5.9M edges.
Once we consider (1 + )-approximate HAC, the set of edges that we can choose to merge in the
first step grows to include all edges whose weight is within (1 + ) factor of Wmax , the largest edge
weight in the graph. Let us call these edges (1 + )-heavy. A major challenge is that the (1 + )-heavy
edges no longer form a matching, and thus cannot be all merged in parallel. To see this, consider an
example where all (1 + )-heavy edges have a common endpoint x. Once one vertex merges with x,
the size of the cluster represented by x increases, which decreases the weights of all edges incident to
x, and as a result some of these edges may cease to be (1 + )-heavy.
Considering the (1 + )-heavy edges motivates the use of geometric layering, a technique where
we group the edges into layers based on their weights and process edges in the same layer in
parallel (e.g., see [10, 12]). In more detail, let Wmax and Wmin be the maximum-weight and
minimum-weight in the graph, respectively. The i-th layer contains all edges with weight between
((1 + )−(i+1) · Wmax , (1 + )−i · Wmax ]. ParHAC processes the layers one at a time; to compute
the next layer it computes the maximum weight edge in the graph Wmax , and processes all edges
between ((1 + )−1 Wmax , Wmax ]. We refer to an iteration of this loop as a layer-contraction phase.
Let us now describe how to implement a layer-contraction phase. The pseudocode for the procedure
is shown in Algorithm 1. The goal is to merge (1 + )-heavy edges in parallel until none are left. The
main challenge is in ensuring that the algorithm does not violate the approximation requirements. An
outer-round of Algorithm 1 begins by randomly coloring active (i.e., non-isolated) vertices either
red or blue (Line 3), assigning each color with probability 1/2. Then, it constructs a graph Gc which
consists of edges of G of weight belonging to the current layer (Line 5). Moreover, Gc only contains


                                                   4
Algorithm 1 ParHAC-ContractLayer(G = (V, E, w), TL , , D)
Input: Similarity graph, G, threshold TL ,  > 0, dendrogram D.
Ensure: All edges in G have weight < TL .
 1: Let Wmax be the current maximum-weight edge in G.
 2: while Wmax ≥ TL do                                                                 . Outer round
 3:     Randomly color active vertices of G either red or blue.
 4:     Let R, B be the sets of red and blue vertices respectively.
 5:     Let Gc = (V, Ec , w), where Ec contains all edges in G that have weight ≥ TL , and connect
    a vertex x ∈ B with a vertex y ∈ R, where the size of y is not smaller than the size of x.
 6:     while |Ec | > 0 do                                                             . Inner round
 7:          Select a random priority πb for b ∈ B.
 8:          Let Cb be a random red neighbor for each b ∈ B.
 9:          Let T = {(Cb , πb , b) | b ∈ B}. Sort T lexicographically.
10:          Let Tr be triples from T with first component equal to r.
11:          For each r ∈ R, select the first prefix of Tr , in which the total size of blue vertices
    exceeds |r|
12:          Let M be the set of (red, blue) vertex pairs selected.
13:          Merge vertices in G and Gc based on the pairs from M , updating edge weights in Gc .
14:          Remove edges of Gc that have two red endpoints or weight below TL
15:          Update D based on M . If multiple b ∈ B merge to a single r ∈ R, merge them into r in
    the sorted order.
16:          Remove r ∈ R from Gc whose cluster size grew by more than a (1 + ) factor since the
    start of the outer round.
17:     Recompute Wmax based on the current state of G.




edges whose endpoints have different colors, and whose red endpoint has larger size than the blue
endpoint. Observe that each edge of G is added to Gc with probability at least 1/4. The algorithm
then performs inner-rounds while the number of edges in Gc is non-zero.
Let us now describe a single inner-round (Lines 6–16). The goal of an inner round is for many blue
vertices to merge into red vertices. Here we allow multiple blue vertices to merge with a single red
vertex. A key property (also exploited in [37]) is that as long as the size of the cluster represented
by x does not grow too much within a single round, the weights of the edges incident to x are very
close to what they were in the beginning of the round. Specifically, assume that (in the beginning of a
round) x represents a cluster of size c. Then, until the size of this cluster exceeds (1 + ) · c, the edges
incident to x that were (1 + )-heavy at the beginning of the round remain (at least) (1 + )2 -heavy.
This allows us to merge multiple vertices with x in a single round, at the cost of increasing the
approximation ratio to (1 + )2 (which can be reduced to (1 + ) by scaling  by a constant factor).
More specifically, an inner round is implemented as follows. For each blue vertex b ∈ B, the
algorithm selects a uniformly random priority πb ∈ [0, 1] (Line 7) which is used to perform symmetry
breaking when merging vertices. It then chooses a random red neighbor, Cb , for each b ∈ B (Line 8).
If a blue vertex has no red neighbors it will not participate in the subsequent steps, but for simplicity
when describing the algorithm we assume that each b ∈ B has a valid Cb . The algorithm then builds
T , a set of triples for each b ∈ B containing the value of its candidate red neighbor Cb , its priority πb ,
and its id, b (Line 9), and sorts this set lexicographically. We call the elements of T proposals. At this
point, a red vertex may have proposals to merge from a large number of blue neighbors, and so the
algorithm selects for each r ∈ R the first prefix of Tr (the merges proposing to r) whose total cluster
size exceeds |r| (Lines 10–11). If no prefix of Tr has this property, the algorithm selects all of Tr .
Finally, the algorithm gathers all of the (r, b) vertex pairs that were selected (Line 12) and applies
these merges to update both G and Gc (Line 13). Note that after this update we remove all edges of
Gc that have two red endpoints, and as a result we maintain the invariant that each edge of Gc has
two endpoints of distinct colors, and the size of the red endpoint is at least the size of the blue one.


                                                     5
2.1       Theoretical Analysis

We show that our algorithm performs nearly-linear total work, has poly-logarithmic depth, and thus
polynomial parallelism, and has good approximation guarantees. For the purpose of this analysis we
assume that  > 0 is a constant. We provide proofs in the Appendix and outline the main ideas here.
We start by analyzing a layer-contraction phase, and bound the total work and number of rounds
required. We start by showing that within each inner round of Algorithm 1, each blue vertex makes
progress in expectation either by being merged, or by having many edges incident to it be deleted.
Lemma 2.1. Consider an arbitrary blue vertex b within an inner round. Within this round either (a)
a constant factor of edges incident to b are deleted, or (b) with constant probability b is merged into
one of its red neighbors.

Using this property, we can bound the number of inner rounds within an outer round to be O(log n)
whp. Next, we show that the number of outer rounds is also O(log n) whp.
Lemma 2.2. The number of outer rounds in a call to Algorithm 1 is O(log n) with high probability.

The proof works by showing that for each edge e of the graph Gc at the beginning of the loop, either
(a) the endpoints of e are merged together, or (b) the weight of e drops below TL , or (c) an endpoint
of e increases its size by a factor of (1 + ).
Finally, assuming the aspect-ratio A = Wmax /Wmin = O(poly(n)), the number of layer-contraction
phases is O(polylog(n)).5 Putting all of the previous results together and implementing the algorithm
using standard parallel primitives in the work-depth model, we obtain the following result:
Theorem 2.3. ParHAC is a (1 + )-approximate algorithm for average-linkage HAC that runs in
Õ(m + n) work in expectation and has O(log4 (n)) depth with high probability.

2.2       Lower Bound

We complement our upper bound with a parallel hardness result for exact graph-based average-linkage
HAC. Since the problem is in P, we show P-hardness to show the P-completeness result. Specifically,
we give an NC reduction from the P-complete monotone circuit-value problem (monotone CVP) by
transforming a monotone circuit into a graph-based HAC instance such that two vertices are merged
into the same cluster with a given merge similarity if and only if a target output gate evaluates to
true. With minor modifications, our reduction extends to the show the P-completeness of a variant of
average-linkage called WPGMA-linkage; we provide our constructions and proofs in the Appendix.

2.3       Algorithm Implementation

We implemented ParHAC in C++ using the CPAM (Compressed Parallel Augmented Maps) frame-
work [38], which provides compressed and highly space-efficient ordered maps and sets. We build on
CPAM’s implementation of the Aspen framework [33, 38], which provides a compressed dynamic
graph representation that supports efficient parallel updates (batch edge insertions and deletions).
Compressed Clustered Graph Representation. In practice ParHAC can perform a large number
of rounds per-layer in the case where  is small (e.g.,  = 0.01). Although updating the entire graph
on each of these rounds is theoretically-efficient (the algorithm will only perform Õ(m + n) work),
many of these rounds only merge a small number of vertices, and leave the majority of the edges
unaffected, and so updating the entire graph each round can be highly wasteful.
Instead, we designed an efficient compressed clustered graph representation using the CPAM
framework [38] which enables us to update the underlying similarity graph in work proportional
to the number of merged vertices and their incident neighbors, rather than proportional to the total
number of edges in the graph. Importantly, using CPAM enables lossless compression for integer-
keyed maps to store the cluster adjacency information using just a few bytes per edge.6 We provide
more details about the representation and the supported operations in the Appendix.
      5
    All existing HAC approximation algorithms make similar assumptions on the aspect ratio [4, 37].
      6
    We obtain a 2.9x space savings using our CPAM-based implementation over an optimized hashtable-based
implementation of a clustered graph; the running times of both implementations are essentially the same.


                                                   6
Other Hierarchical Graph Clustering Algorithms. Our new clustered graph representation makes
it very easy to implement other parallel graph clustering algorithms. In particular, we developed a
faithful version of the Affinity clustering algorithm [8] and the recently proposed SCC algorithm [54]
(which is essentially a thresholded version of Affinity) using a few dozens of lines of additional code.
Both algorithms are essentially heuristics that are designed to mimic the behavior of HAC, while
running in very few rounds (an important constraint for the distributed environments these algorithms
are designed for). We note that most of the work done by these algorithms is the work required to
merge clusters in the underlying graph, and so by using the same primitives for merging graphs, we
eliminate a significant source of differences when comparing algorithms.

3     Empirical Evaluation

Experimental Setup. We ran all of our experiments on a 72-core Dell PowerEdge R930 (with
two-way hyper-threading) with 4 × 2.4GHz Intel 18-core E7-8867 v4 Xeon processors (with a
4800MHz bus and 45MB L3 cache) and 1TB of main memory. Our programs use a lightweight
work-stealing parallel scheduler [5, 13]. Further details about our setup and input data can be found
in the Appendix.
HAC Algorithms Evaluated. We compare ParHAC with several HAC baselines. SeqHAC is the
approximate sequential average-linkage algorithm that was recently introduced [37]. ParHACE and
SeqHACE are exact versions of the ParHAC and SeqHAC algorithms, where the ParHAC code takes
TL = Wmax in each layer-contraction phase and sets  = 0 (i.e., the layer only consists of equal-
weight edges). ParHAC0.1 and SeqHAC0.1 both use  = 0.1. We also evaluate our implementation of
Affinity clustering [8] and the recently developed SCC algorithm [54], which we refer to as ParAffinity
and ParSCCsim . Both these algorithms can be thought of as heuristic parallelizations of the HAC
algorithm, which are designed with speed and good parallelization properties in mind. We describe
these in more detail in the Appendix. Lastly, we also compare the graph-based implementations of
HAC to pointset-based HAC implementations from the scipy package using the single-, complete-,
average-, and Ward-linkage measures. These are exact HAC algorithms, which look at the complete
similarity matrix and thus require time which is at least quadratic in the input size.
Building Similarity Graphs from Pointsets. Some of our experiments generate graphs from a
pointset by computing the approximate nearest neighbors (ANN) of each point, and converting the
                                                                                                   1
distances to similarities. We convert distances to similarities using the formula sim(u, v) = 1+dist(u,v) .
We then reweight the similarities by dividing each similarity by the maximum similarity. We compute
the k-approximate nearest neighbors using a shared-memory parallel implementation of the Vamana
approximate nearest neighbors (ANN) algorithm [44] with parameters R = 75, L = 100, Q =
max(L, k). We discuss more details about the process in the Appendix.

3.1   Quality Evaluation

We start by investigating the quality of ParHAC with respect to ground-truth clusterings. Our goal is
to understand (1) whether ParHAC preserves the clustering quality of exact average-linkage HAC
(using a complete similarity matrix), and (2) what value of  to use in practice. The results in this
sub-section affirmatively answer (1), and show that a value of  = 0.1 achieves comparable quality
to exact average-linkage HAC, which prior works have identified as a state-of-the-art hierarchical
clustering method and use as their primary quality baseline [8, 37, 54].
We evaluate our algorithms on the iris, wine, digits, and cancer, and faces classification datasets from
the UCI dataset repository (found in the sklearn.datasets package). We run all of the graph-based
clustering algorithms on similarity graphs generated from the input pointsets using k = 10 in the
approximate k-NN construction. We run the scipy pointset clustering algorithms directly on the
input pointsets. To measure quality, we use the Adjusted Rand-Index (ARI) and Normalized Mutual
Information (NMI) scores, as well as the Dendrogram Purity measure of a hierarchical clustering [42]
which we define in the Appendix. We also study the unsupervised Dasgupta Cost [27] measure. We
give definitions of the measures in the Appendix.
Results. We present a table of our results in the Appendix and summarize our findings here. Our
main finding is that ParHAC0.1 achieves consistently high-quality results across all of the quality


                                                    7
         1.0




                                                                                      Running time in seconds (logscale)
                                                                                                                                   ParHAC-Cluster
                                                                                                                                   ParHAC
                                                                                                                            103
         0.8                                                                                                                       SeqHAC
                                                                                                                                   fastcluster
               SciPy
                                                                                                                            102
         0.6
                                                                                                                            101



   ARI
         0.4
                                                                                                                            100

         0.2                              Affinity           ParHac-0.1                                                    10−1
                                          ParHac-0.0         ParHac-1.0
                            k = 10        ParHac-0.01        SCC
         0.0                                                                                                               10−2
                       22            24                 26         28     210                                                     103               104          105      106
                                          k in k-NN graph                                                                                   Number of points (logscale)

Figure 1: ARI score on the digits point dataset as                                  Figure 2: End-to-end running times of fastcluster’s
a function of the k used in graph building. ParHAC                                  unweighted average-linkage, SeqHAC using  = 0.1,
using  = 0.1 is the green line using + markers. The                                and ParHAC using  = 0.1 and 144 hyper-threads on
gray vertical line highlights the values for k = 10,                                varying-size slices of the glove-100 dataset. The time
which is the value of k we use in our detailed quality                              for SeqHAC and ParHAC includes the cost of solv-
evaluation in the Appendix. The red horizontal line is                              ing ANN and generating the input similarity graph;
the ARI of SciPy’s average-linkage.                                                 ParHAC-Cluster shows only the clustering time. We
                                                                                    terminated methods that run for more than 3 hours.


measures. For instance, for the ARI measure, ParHAC0.1 is on average within 1.5% of the best ARI
score for each graph (and achieves the best score for one of the graphs). For the NMI measure,
ParHAC0.1 is on average within 1.3% of the best NMI score for each graph (and again achieves the
best score for two of the graphs). ParHAC0.1 also achieves good results for the dendrogram purity
and Dasgupta cost measures. For purity, it is on average within 1.9% of the best purity score for each
graph, achieving the best score for one of the graphs, and for the unsupervised Dasgupta cost measure
it is on average within 1.03% of the smallest Dasgupta cost score for each graph.
Compared with the SciPy average-linkage which is an exact HAC algorithm running on the underlying
pointset, ParHAC0.1 achieves 14.4% better ARI score on average, 3.6% better NMI score on average,
4.7% better dendrogram purity on average, and 1.02% larger Dasgupta cost on average. Compared to
the best quality result obtained by either SCCsim or Affinity, ParHAC0.1 consistently obtains better
quality results, achieving 35.6% better ARI score on average, 12.1% better NMI score on average,
6.7% better dendrogram purity on average, and 3.1% better Dasgupta cost on average.
Overall, we find that ParHAC achieves consistently high quality results across the four quality
measures that we evaluate. Our results show that being more faithful to the HAC algorithm allows
ParHAC to obtain meaningful quality gains over Affinity and SCCsim .

Results with Varying k. When converting a pointset input to the similarity setting using the k-NN
approach as in this paper, what value of k is required to achieve high quality? We studied each of the
quality measures for the studied algorithms as a function of the k used in the k-NN construction, and
present our full results for each measure and each dataset in the Appendix. Here, Figure 1 shows a
representative result for the ARI measure on the digits point dataset.
We find that even modest values of k yield very high quality results and can significantly outperform
exact metric HAC algorithms on the original pointset. Furthermore, even tripling, or increasing k
an order of magnitude either yields negligible improvement for most quality measures, or in fact
degrades the quality. For example, for ParHAC with  = 0.1, using k = 100 is 10% worse than using
k = 10, and using k = 1000 is 47% worse than k = 10. Our results suggest a twofold benefit from
using a graph-based approach: (1) since small values of k are sufficient for high quality results, the
inputs to the clustering algorithm can be smaller, resulting in faster running times, and (2) the overall
clustering quality is higher with small inputs and can lead to significant improvements over using
more similarities (or using the full dissimilarity matrix, as in pointset clustering algorithms).

3.2       Evaluation on Large Real-World Graphs

Next, we evaluated ParHAC’s scalability on large real-world graphs, including both social network
graphs, as well as sparse, high-diameter networks. We note that the Hyperlink (HL) graph is one of
the largest publicly-available graphs and contains 1.7B vertices and 125B edges. Additional details
and experiments can be found in the supplementary material; we summarize them:
  (1) ParHAC achieves betewen 25.7–61.3x speedup over its running time on a single thread.


                                                                                8
                               Values on top of bars are running times (in seconds)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ParHAC                                         ParRAC




                                                                                                                                                                                                    4.18e+03
                         104




                                                                                                                                                                                                     4.7e+03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SeqHAC                                         ParAffinity




                                                                                                                                                             2.58e+03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SeqHACE                                        ParSCCsim




                                                                                                                                                         1.2e+03
  Relative performance




                                                                                    404
                         103




                                                                             96.8




                                                                                                                       234
                                                                                                                       230




                                                                                                                                                                                                               159
                         102




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.09e+04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4.94e+03
                                                                                                                                                                        66.9
                                       7.66




                                                                                          15.7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8.76e+03
                                       6.85




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   623




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3.9e+03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              951
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        350
                                                                                                                                                                                             32.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            30.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   739
                                                                                                                                                  18.4




                                                                                                                                                                                      15.4
                                                                      3.42
                                                              0.974
                                              0.972




                                                                                                                             14.2

                                                                                                                                           13.6
                                1.11




                                                                                                         2.37


                                                                                                                11.2
                         101
                                                      0.177




                                                                                                 0.382




                                                                                                                                    2.03




                                                                                                                                                                               1.54




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 18.7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            47.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             312




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                640
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         x x x                      x x x                            x x x                              x x x
                         100
                                         DB                                         YT                                  RD                                       LJ                                     OK                                TW                          FS                              CW                                   HL

Figure 3: Relative performance of our ParHAC algorithm compared to other graph-HAC and HAC-inspired
algorithms. We prefix new implementations developed in this paper with the Par prefix. The values on top of
each bar show the running time of each algorithm in seconds. The times shown for the parallel algorithms are
144 hyper-thread times. We run the ParHAC and SeqHAC algorithm using  = 0.1. We terminated algorithms
that ran longer than 6 hours and mark them with a red x.




  (2) We evaluated the running time of ParHAC when the edge weights in the graph are selected
      based on structural properties of the input, e.g., the degree, or the number of triangles closed
      by the edge. Overall, we evaluated 6 highly-different weighting schemes, and find that the gap
      between the fastest and slowest schemes per-graph is at most 5x.
  (3) Running ParHAC with larger values of  consistently results in lower running times, due to the
      fewer number of rounds used for large .
Figure 3 shows the relative performance and of ParHAC compared with the SeqHAC and SeqHACE
algorithms, and our implementations of the RAC, Affinity, and SCCsim algorithms. We see that our
Affinity implementation is always the fastest on our graph inputs. This is due to the low theoretical
and empirical round-complexity of Affinity. Compared with Affinity, SCCsim , which runs Affinity
with weight thresholding using 100 iterations is an average of 11.5x slower than Affinity due to the
cost of the additional iterations. Compared to Affinity and SCCsim , ParHAC is an average of 14.8x
slower than our Affinity implementation and 1.24x slower than our SCCsim implementation. The
speed difference between ParHAC and Affinity is due to the larger number of fine-grained rounds
required by ParHAC. However, as we showed in Section 3.1, the faster running time of affinity
clustering and SCCsim comes at the cost of significantly lower quality.
Compared with methods that implement exact or 1 + -approximate HAC, ParHAC is significantly
faster. Compared with SeqHAC and SeqHACE , ParHAC obtains 50.1x and 86.4x speedup on average
respectively. Compared with RAC, ParHAC achieves an average speedup of 7.1x on the graphs that
RAC can successfully complete within the time limit. Although RAC is faster than ParHAC on two
of our small graph inputs, it requires a very large number of rounds on the remaining graphs.
To the best of our knowledge, our results are the first to show that graphs with tens to hundreds
of billions of edges can be clustered in a matter of tens of minutes (using heuristics like Affinity
and SCCsim with fewer iterations) to hours (using SCCsim with many iterations, or methods with
approximation guarantees such as ParHAC). Recently, results on trillion-edge similarity graphs
have been reported [54, 71]. Due to the memory requirements of storing such large datasets in
memory, ParHAC may not be directly applicable; however, it may be possible to design a distributed
(1 + )-approximate HAC algorithm with low round-complexity by building on the ideas in this paper.


Discussion. To the best of our knowledge, our results are the first to show that graphs with tens
to hundreds of billions of edges can be clustered in a matter of tens of minutes (using heuristic
methods like Affinity and SCCsim with fewer iterations) to hours (using SCCsim with many iterations
or methods with approximation guarantees such as ParHAC). We are not aware of other shared-
memory clustering results that work at this large scale. Our theoretically-efficient implementations
can be viewed as part of a recent line of work showing that theoretically-efficient shared-memory
parallel graph algorithms can scale to the largest publicly available graphs using a modest amount of
resources [31–33, 35, 65, 66].


                                                                                                                                                                                                    9
3.3       Pointset Clustering: End-to-End Evaluation

We conclude by evaluating the performance of ParHAC in the case when the input is a pointset.
In this setting, in order to use a graph-based HAC algorithm, one needs to construct a similarity
graph before running the clustering algorithm. As a baseline, we use the average-linkage HAC
implementation from fastcluster [58], which takes a pointset input. We compare with fastcluster as
we found it yields more consistent (and slightly faster) performance for larger numbers of points than
the implementations in sklearn and SciPy.7 We also compare ParHAC to the SeqHAC algorithm in
this setting, where SeqHAC uses the same similarity-graph building method as ParHAC described
earlier in this section, and both algorithms are run using  = 0.1.
We run our end-to-end experiment on the Glove-100 dataset, which is a 100-dimensional dataset
containing vector-embeddings for 1.18 million words. Figure 2 shows the results of our experiment.
We stress that the running times of the graph-based algorithms (SeqHAC and ParHAC) include the
time spent building the graph. First, we found that for n > 3000, the end-to-end times of ParHAC are
always faster than the time taken by fastcluster, and for n > 9400, the end-to-end times of SeqHAC
are always faster than the time taken by fastcluster. Comparing fastcluster on the largest slice of the
Glove-100 dataset it can solve in under three hours with the graph-based methods, SeqHAC is 20x
faster, and ParHAC is 417x faster.

4         Conclusion
In this paper we have introduced ParHAC, the first parallel algorithm for hierarchical agglomerative
graph clustering using the average-linkage measure that has strong theoretical-bounds on its work
and depth, as well as provable approximation guarantees. We have shown that ParHAC scales to
massive real-world graphs with tens to hundreds of billions of edges on a single machine and achieves
high-quality results compared to existing graph-based and pointset-based hierarchical clustering
methods.
An interesting question for future work is whether we can reduce the round complexity of our
algorithm to make it more suitable for distributed settings. Another interesting question is to compare
the running time and quality of bottom-up HAC methods for size-constrained clustering and balanced
partitioning problems, which typically rely on top-down methods [7? , 19, 30, 46]. Although
it has recently been shown that it may not be possible to design algorithms for incremental and
dynamic HAC with good worst-case guarantees [73], it would be interesting to design practical
(1 + )-approximations for these settings, potentially building on ideas from ParHAC.

References
 [1] Chem dataset. https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Gas+sensor+
     array+under+dynamic+gas+mixtures.
 [2] Geolife dataset.      https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/
     publication/geolife-gps-trajectory-dataset-user-guide/.
 [3] Uci1 dataset. https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/magic+gamma+
     telescopes.
 [4] Amir Abboud, Vincent Cohen-Addad, and Hussein Houdrouge. Subquadratic high-dimensional
     hierarchical clustering. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 11580–
     11590, 2019.
 [5] Nimar S Arora, Robert D Blumofe, and C Greg Plaxton. Thread scheduling for multipro-
     grammed multiprocessors. Theory of Computing Systems (TOCS), 34(2):115–144, 2001.
 [6] Martin Aumüller, Erik Bernhardsson, and Alexander Faithfull. Ann-benchmarks: A benchmark-
     ing tool for approximate nearest neighbor algorithms. In International Conference on Similarity
     Search and Applications, pages 34–49. Springer, 2017.
      7
   We performed a similar comparison with the recently proposed ParChain framework for exact euclidean
HAC [75]; here, ParHAC obtained an average of 39.3x speedup (end-to-end) in parallel over ParChain.


                                                  10
 [7] Kevin Aydin, MohammadHossein Bateni, and Vahab Mirrokni. Distributed balanced partitioning
     via linear embedding. Algorithms, 12(8).
 [8] MohammadHossein Bateni, Soheil Behnezhad, Mahsa Derakhshan, MohammadTaghi Haji-
     aghayi, Raimondas Kiveris, Silvio Lattanzi, and Vahab Mirrokni. Affinity clustering: Hierarchi-
     cal clustering at scale. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pages
     6864–6874, 2017.
 [9] Jean-Paul Benzécri. Construction d’une classification ascendante hiérarchique par la recherche
     en chaîne des voisins réciproques. Cahiers de l’analyse des données, 7(2):209–218, 1982.
[10] Bonnie Berger, John Rompel, and Peter W. Shor. Efficient NC algorithms for set cover with
     applications to learning and geometry. J. Computer and System Sciences, 49(3):454–477, 1994.
[11] Guy E. Blelloch and Bruce M. Maggs. Algorithms and theory of computation handbook. chapter
     Parallel Algorithms. Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2010. ISBN 978-1-58488-820-8.
[12] Guy E. Blelloch, Richard Peng, and Kanat Tangwongsan. Linear-work greedy parallel approxi-
     mate set cover and variants. In ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architectures
     (SPAA), pages 23–32, 2011.
[13] Guy E. Blelloch, Daniel Anderson, and Laxman Dhulipala. Parlaylib - a toolkit for parallel
     algorithms on shared-memory multicore machines. In ACM Symposium on Parallelism in
     Algorithms and Architectures (SPAA), pages 507—-509, 2020.
[14] Guy E Blelloch, Jeremy T Fineman, Yan Gu, and Yihan Sun. Optimal parallel algorithms in
     the binary-forking model. In ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architectures
     (SPAA), pages 89–102, 2020.
[15] Guy E. Blelloch, Laxman Dhulipala, and Yihan Sun. Introduction to parallel algorithms.
     http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~guyb/paralg/paralg/parallel.pdf, 2021.
[16] RK Bock, A Chilingarian, M Gaug, F Hakl, Th Hengstebeck, M Jiřina, J Klaschka, E Kotrč,
     P Savickỳ, S Towers, et al. Methods for multidimensional event classification: a case study
     using images from a cherenkov gamma-ray telescope. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in
     Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment,
     516(2-3):511–528, 2004.
[17] Paolo Boldi and Sebastiano Vigna. The WebGraph framework I: Compression techniques. In
     International World Wide Web Conference (WWW), pages 595–601, 2004.
[18] Otakar Borůvka. O jistém problému minimálním. Práce Mor. Přírodověd. Spol. v Brně III, 3:
     37–58, 1926.
[19] Aydın Buluç, Henning Meyerhenke, Ilya Safro, Peter Sanders, and Christian Schulz. Recent
     advances in graph partitioning. Algorithm engineering, pages 117–158, 2016.
[20] Moses Charikar and Vaggos Chatziafratis. Approximate hierarchical clustering via sparsest
     cut and spreading metrics. In ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages
     841–854, 2017.
[21] Moses Charikar, Vaggos Chatziafratis, and Rad Niazadeh. Hierarchical clustering better than
     average-linkage. In ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 2291–2304,
     2019.
[22] Evangelos Chatziafratis. Hierarchical clustering with global objectives: Approximation algo-
     rithms and hardness results. Stanford University, 2020.
[23] Michael Cochez and Hao Mou. Twister tries: Approximate hierarchical agglomerative clustering
     for average distance in linear time. In ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management
     of Data, pages 505–517, 2015.
[24] Vincent Cohen-Addad, Varun Kanade, and Frederik Mallmann-Trenn. Hierarchical clustering
     beyond the worst-case. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30,
     pages 6201–6209. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.


                                                11
[25] Vincent Cohen-Addad, Varun Kanade, Frederik Mallmann-Trenn, and Claire Mathieu. Hierar-
     chical clustering: Objective functions and algorithms. J. ACM, 66(4), 2019.
[26] Thomas H. Cormen, Charles E. Leiserson, Ronald L. Rivest, and Clifford Stein. Introduction to
     Algorithms (3. ed.). MIT Press, 2009.
[27] Sanjoy Dasgupta. A cost function for similarity-based hierarchical clustering. In ACM Sympo-
     sium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 118–127, 2016.
[28] Manoranjan Dash, Simona Petrutiu, and Peter Scheuermann. pPOP: Fast yet accurate parallel
     hierarchical clustering using partitioning. Data Knowl. Eng., 61(3):563–578, 2007.
[29] Camil Demetrescu, Andrew Goldberg, and David Johnson. 9th dimacs implementation chal-
     lenge: Shortest paths. http://www.dis.uniroma1.it/challenge9/, 2019.
[30] Laxman Dhulipala, Igor Kabiljo, Brian Karrer, Giuseppe Ottaviano, Sergey Pupyrev, and Alon
     Shalita. Compressing graphs and indexes with recursive graph bisection. In ACM International
     Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD), pages 1535–1544, 2016.
[31] Laxman Dhulipala, Guy E. Blelloch, and Julian Shun. Julienne: A framework for parallel graph
     algorithms using work-efficient bucketing. In ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms
     and Architectures (SPAA), pages 293–304, 2017.
[32] Laxman Dhulipala, Guy E. Blelloch, and Julian Shun. Theoretically efficient parallel graph
     algorithms can be fast and scalable. In ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and
     Architectures (SPAA), pages 293–304, 2018.
[33] Laxman Dhulipala, Guy E Blelloch, and Julian Shun. Low-latency graph streaming using
     compressed purely-functional trees. In ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language
     Design and Implementation (PLDI), pages 918–934, 2019.
[34] Laxman Dhulipala, Changwan Hong, and Julian Shun. ConnectIt: A framework for static and
     incremental parallel graph connectivity algorithms. Proc. VLDB Endow., 14(4):653–667, 2020.
[35] Laxman Dhulipala, Charlie McGuffey, Hongbo Kang, Yan Gu, Guy E Blelloch, Phillip B
     Gibbons, and Julian Shun. Sage: Parallel semi-asymmetric graph algorithms for NVRAMs.
     Proc. VLDB Endow., 13(9):1598–1613, 2020.
[36] Laxman Dhulipala, Jessica Shi, Tom Tseng, Guy E. Blelloch, and Julian Shun. The graph based
     benchmark suite (GBBS). In International Workshop on Graph Data Management Experiences
     and Systems (GRADES) and Network Data Analytics (NDA), pages 11:1–11:8, 2020.
[37] Laxman Dhulipala, David Eisenstat, Jakub Łacki,
                                                 ˛     Vahab Mirrokni, and Jessica Shi. Hierarchical
     agglomerative graph clustering in nearly-linear time. In International Conference on Machine
     Learning (ICML), pages 2676–2686, 2021.
[38] Laxman Dhulipala, Guy E Blelloch, Yan Gu, and Yihan Sun. PaC-trees: Supporting parallel
     and compressed purely-functional collections. In ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming
     Language Design and Implementation (PLDI), 2022.
[39] Jordi Fonollosa, Sadique Sheik, Ramón Huerta, and Santiago Marco. Reservoir computing
     compensates slow response of chemosensor arrays exposed to fast varying gas concentrations in
     continuous monitoring. Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, 215:618–629, 2015.
[40] P. Franti, O. Virmajoki, and V. Hautamaki. Fast agglomerative clustering using a k-nearest
     neighbor graph. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 28(11):
     1875–1881, 2006.
[41] Sudipto Guha, Rajeev Rastogi, and Kyuseok Shim. Rock: A robust clustering algorithm for
     categorical attributes. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Data Engineering,
     pages 512–521, USA, 1999.
[42] Katherine A. Heller and Zoubin Ghahramani. Bayesian hierarchical clustering. In International
     Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pages 297–304, 2005.


                                                12
[43] Changwan Hong, Laxman Dhulipala, and Julian Shun. Exploring the design space of static and
     incremental graph connectivity algorithms on gpus. In International Conference on Parallel
     Architectures and Compilation Techniques (PACT), pages 55–69, 2020.
[44] Suhas Jayaram Subramanya, Fnu Devvrit, Harsha Vardhan Simhadri, Ravishankar Krishnawamy,
     and Rohan Kadekodi. DiskANN: Fast accurate billion-point nearest neighbor search on a single
     node. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
[45] Yongkweon Jeon and Sungroh Yoon. Multi-threaded hierarchical clustering by parallel nearest-
     neighbor chaining. IEEE Trans. Parallel Distributed Syst., 26(9):2534–2548, 2015.
[46] Igor Kabiljo, Brian Karrer, Mayank Pundir, Sergey Pupyrev, and Alon Shalita. Social hash par-
     titioner: A scalable distributed hypergraph partitioner. Proc. VLDB Endow., 10(11):1418–1429,
     2017.
[47] George Karypis, Eui-Hong (Sam) Han, and Vipin Kumar. Chameleon: Hierarchical clustering
     using dynamic modeling. Computer, 32(8):68–75, August 1999.
[48] Benjamin King. Step-wise clustering procedures. Journal of the American Statistical Associa-
     tion, 69:86–101, 1967.
[49] Haewoon Kwak, Changhyun Lee, Hosung Park, and Sue Moon. What is twitter, a social network
     or a news media? In International World Wide Web Conference (WWW), pages 591–600, 2010.
[50] G. N. Lance and W. T. Williams. A general theory of classificatory sorting strategies 1.
     Hierarchical systems. Computer Journal, 9(4):373–380, February 1967.
[51] Jure Leskovec and Andrej Krevl. SNAP Datasets: Stanford large network dataset collection,
     2014.
[52] Christopher D Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan, and Hinrich Schütze. Introduction to Information
     Retrieval. Cambridge University Press, 2008.
[53] Robert Meusel, Sebastiano Vigna, Oliver Lehmberg, and Christian Bizer. The graph structure
     in the web–analyzed on different aggregation levels. The Journal of Web Science, 1(1):33–47,
     2015.
[54] Nicholas Monath, Avinava Dubey, Guru Guruganesh, Manzil Zaheer, Amr Ahmed, Andrew
     McCallum, Gokhan Mergen, Marc Najork, Mert Terzihan, Bryon Tjanaka, et al. Scalable
     agglomerative clustering. In ACM International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
     Mining (KDD), pages 1245–1255, 2021.
[55] Benjamin Moseley and Joshua R. Wang. Approximation bounds for hierarchical clustering:
     Average linkage, bisecting k-means, and local search. In Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems, pages 3094–3103, 2017.
[56] Benjamin Moseley, Kefu Lu, Silvio Lattanzi, and Thomas Lavastida. A framework for paral-
     lelizing hierarchical clustering methods. In ECML PKDD 2019, 2019.
[57] Fionn Murtagh and Pedro Contreras. Algorithms for hierarchical clustering: an overview. Wiley
     Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 2(1):86–97, 2012.
[58] Daniel Müllner. fastcluster: Fast hierarchical, agglomerative clustering routines for r and python.
     Journal of Statistical Software, Articles, 53(9):1–18, 2013.
[59] Clark F. Olson. Parallel algorithms for hierarchical clustering. Parallel Comput., 21(8):1313–
     1325, 1995.
[60] C. A. Phillips. Parallel graph contraction. In ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms
     and Architectures (SPAA), pages 148–157, 1989.
[61] Sanguthevar Rajasekaran. Efficient parallel hierarchical clustering algorithms. IEEE Transac-
     tions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, 16(6):497–502, 2005.


                                                  13
[62] J. Reif. Optimal parallel algorithms for integer sorting and graph connectivity. Technical Report
     TR-08-85, Harvard University, 1985.
[63] Aurko Roy and Sebastian Pokutta. Hierarchical clustering via spreading metrics. In Advances
     in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), volume 29, pages 2316–2324. Curran
     Associates, Inc., 2016.
[64] Jianyin Shao, Stephen W. Tanner, Nephi Thompson, and Thomas E. Cheatham. Clustering
     molecular dynamics trajectories: 1. Characterizing the performance of different clustering
     algorithms. Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation, 3(6):2312–2334, 2007.
[65] Jessica Shi, Laxman Dhulipala, David Eisenstat, Jakub Łăcki, and Vahab Mirrokni. Scalable
     community detection via parallel correlation clustering. Proc. VLDB Endow., 14(11):2305–2313,
     2021.
[66] Jessica Shi, Laxman Dhulipala, and Julian Shun. Parallel clique counting and peeling algorithms.
     In SIAM Conference on Applied and Computational Discrete Algorithms (ACDA21), pages
     135–146. SIAM, 2021.
[67] Julian Shun and Guy E Blelloch. Phase-concurrent hash tables for determinism. In ACM
     Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architectures (SPAA), pages 96–107, 2014.
[68] Julian Shun, Laxman Dhulipala, and Guy E. Blelloch. A simple and practical linear-work
     parallel algorithm for connectivity. In ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and
     Architectures (SPAA), pages 143–153, 2014.
[69] Julian Shun, Laxman Dhulipala, and Guy E. Blelloch. Smaller and faster: Parallel processing
     of compressed graphs with Ligra+. In Data Compression Conference (DCC), pages 403–412,
     2015.
[70] Peter H.A. Sneath and Robert R. Sokal. Numerical Taxonomy: The Principles and Practice of
     Numerical Classification. W.H. Freeman, San Francisco, 1973. ISBN 0 7167 0697 0.
[71] Baris Sumengen, Anand Rajagopalan, Gui Citovsky, David Simcha, Olivier Bachem, Pradipta
     Mitra, Sam Blasiak, Mason Liang, and Sanjiv Kumar. Scaling hierarchical agglomerative
     clustering to billion-sized datasets. CoRR, abs/2105.11653, 2021.
[72] The SciPy community. scipy.cluster.hierarchy.linkage. URL https://docs.scipy.org/
     doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.cluster.hierarchy.linkage.
     html. [Online; accessed 1-May-2022].
[73] Tom Tseng, Laxman Dhulipala, and Julian Shun. Parallel batch-dynamic minimum span-
     ning forest and the efficiency of dynamic agglomerative graph clustering. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2205.04956, 2022.
[74] Joe H. Ward. Hierarchical grouping to optimize an objective function. Journal of the American
     Statistical Association, 58(301):236–244, 1963. ISSN 01621459.
[75] Shangdi Yu, Yiqiu Wang, Yan Gu, Laxman Dhulipala, and Julian Shun. Parchain: A framework
     for parallel hierarchical agglomerative clustering using nearest-neighbor chain. Proc. VLDB
     Endow., 15(2):285–298, 2021.
[76] Yu Zheng, Like Liu, Longhao Wang, and Xing Xie. Learning transportation mode from raw
     GPS data for geographic applications on the web. In International Conference on World Wide
     Web, pages 247–256, 2008.




                                                 14
A     Missing Details and Proofs
We denote the degree of vertex v by deg(v) and use Cut(X, Y ) to denote the set of edges between
two sets of vertices X and Y .
In this paper we focus on the average-linkage measure (sometimes also called unweighted average-
linkage orPUPGMA-linkage), which assumes that the similarity between two clusters (X, Y ) is
equal to (x,y)∈Cut(X,Y ) w(x, y)/(|X| · |Y |), that is the total weight of edges between X and Y ,
divided by the maximum number of possible edges between the clusters. A less common variant
of average-linkage is weighted average-linkage (WPGMA-linkage). For this measure, the similarity
between two clusters depends not only on the current clustering, but also on the sequence of merges
that created it. In particular, if a cluster Z is created by merging clusters X and Y , the similarity
of the edge between Z and a neighboring cluster U is W(X,U )+W(Y,U 2
                                                                          )
                                                                            if both edges (X, U ) and
(Y, U ) exist before the merge, and otherwise just the weight of the single existing edge. We stress
that unweighted and weighted in the linkage measure names refer to the linkage methods. In both
cases, throughout this paper we consider graphs with arbitrary non-negative edge weights.
A linkage measure is reducible [9], if for any three clusters X, Y, Z, it holds that W(X ∪ Y, Z) ≤
max(W(X, Z), W(Y, Z)). We note that both average-linkage and weighted average-linkage are
reducible [9].

A.1   Sequential HAC

We start by reviewing the existing exact and (1 + )-approximate sequential HAC algorithms which
are two baselines that we compare against, and also the starting point for our theoretical results.
Exact Average-Linkage. A challenge in implementing the average-linkage HAC algorithm is to
efficiently maintain edge weights in the graph as vertices (clusters) are merged. Since the average-
linkage formula includes the cluster sizes of both endpoints of a (u, v) edge when computing the
weight of the edge, an algorithm which eagerly maintains the correct weights of all edges in the
graph must update all of the edge weights incident to a newly merged cluster. Unfortunately, even for
sparse graphs with O(n) edges, one can show that such an eager approach requires Ω(n2 ) time.
It was recently shown [37] that the exact average-linkage HAC algorithm can be implemented in
    √
Õ(n m) time, using the classic nearest-neighbor chain technique [9, 57] in conjunction with a
low-outdegree orientation data structure.
Approximate Average-Linkage (SeqHAC). Our parallel algorithm is inspired by a recent sequential
approximate average-linkage HAC algorithm which we refer to as SeqHAC [37], which runs in
near-linear time. The sequential algorithm uses a lazy strategy to avoid updating the weights of all
edges incident to each merged vertex. Instead of exactly maintaining the weight of each edge, the
algorithm uses the observation that the weights of edges incident to a vertex do not need to be updated
every time the cluster represented by this vertex grows. Namely, if we allow an (1 + )2 -approximate
algorithm, the weights of edges incident to a vertex do not need to be updated until the cluster-size
of this vertex grows by a multiplicative (1 + ) factor. (The approximation ratio of the algorithm is
squared, since the clusters represented by both endpoints of an edge may grow by a (1 + ) factor
before its weight is updated.) As this can happen at most O(log1+ n) times, for a constant , the
overall number of edge weight updates is Õ(m).
The approximate algorithm adapts the folklore heap-based approach [57], originally designed for an
exact setting to the approximate setting. Specifically, the approximate algorithm maintains a heap
keyed by the vertices, where the value assigned to a vertex is its current highest-weight incident edge
(whose weight is correct up to a (1 + )2 factor). In each iteration, the highest-weight edge is chosen
from the heap and its endpoints are merged. By setting parameters appropriately one can ensure that
the resulting algorithm is (1 + )-approximate.

A.2   Motivating ParHAC

Recall that our approach is based on geometric layering, where we group the edges based on
their weights and process all edges within the same layer in parallel. Let Wmax and Wmin be the
maximum-weight and minimum-weight in the graph, respectively. In the geometric layering scheme,


                                                  15
the i-th layer contains all edges with weight between ((1 + )−(i+1) · Wmax , (1 + )−i · Wmax ]. The
layering algorithm then processes these layers one-by-one, starting with the heaviest-weight layer.
An active vertex is a vertex that has edges in the layer currently being processed by the algorithm.
Under the standard assumption that the aspect-ratio of the graph is polynomially bounded, that is
A = Wmax /Wmin = O(poly(n)), we can show that the maximum number of layers processed by
the algorithm is O(log n) for any constant . We note that on the real-world datasets evaluated in this
paper, which include both graphs derived from real-world pointsets, and real-world graphs, the aspect
ratio is at most 1000, and that all existing HAC approximation algorithms make similar assumptions
on the aspect ratio [4, 37]. The key challenge for a parallel approximation algorithm based on this
paradigm is that it must process all of the elements within each layer in polylog(n) rounds, while
ensuring that it does not violate the (1 + ) approximation requirements.


Natural Approaches: Spanning Forest and Affinity. A natural idea is to compute a spanning
forest induced by the edges within the current layer, and to merge together all vertices in each tree
in the forest. Using this approach, all edges within the current layer can be processed in a single
spanning-forest step. Furthermore, after applying these merges all remaining edges in the graph fall
into layers of smaller weight. Using a work-efficient spanning forest algorithm, the overall work and
depth of this approach will be Õ(m) and O(polylog(n)), respectively [68].
A similar idea is used in the Affinity Clustering algorithm of Bateni et al. [8]. In this algorithm, each
vertex marks its highest-weight incident edge, and the sets of vertices to be merged are the connected
components of the graph formed by the marked edges. It is easy to see that this approach yields a
Õ(m) work and O(polylog(n)) depth algorithm in the geometric layering scheme.
Unfortunately, both of these natural approaches fail to yield (1 + )-approximate algorithms because
they both choose “locally good” edges to merge without taking into account how the similarities of
these edges change as they are mapped to binary merges in the dendrogram. For example, if the
input graph is a path consisting of edges of the same weight, the spanning forest approach would
merge all of the vertices together in one step. At the same time it is easy to see that for  < 1/2 an
(1 + )-approximate algorithm, within a single layer, must merge sets of vertices of size at most 2.


Our Approach: Capacitated Random Mate. Our approach is inspired by the classic random-
mate technique [11] when processing each layer, but requires a careful modification to yield good
approximation guarantees. Our algorithm starts by first randomly coloring the active vertices red
and blue with equal probability. Directly applying the random-mate approach (e.g., as applied in
the parallel connectivity algorithms of Reif [62] and Phillips [60]) would suggest merging all blue
vertices into an arbitrary red neighbor. The number of edges in the layer decreases by a constant
factor in expectation, thus yielding the desired work and depth bounds. Unfortunately, this approach
does not yield good approximation guarantees for the same reason that the spanning forest and affinity
approaches fail to do so. The issue is that the size of a red cluster can become too large, causing
the similarity of a merged edge to be much smaller than Wmax /(1 + ), where Wmax is the current
largest edge weight.
Our capacitated random-mate approach fixes this issue with the classic random-mate strategy by
processing each layer in multiple rounds and enforcing vertex-capacities for the red vertices in each
round. These capacities ensure that the sizes of clusters represented by red vertices increase by at
most a (1 + ) factor within a round. As a result, the weight of each edge incident to a red vertex may
only decrease by a (1 + ) factor.
Specifically, consider a red vertex v representing a cluster C. Assume that at the beginning of a round
all edge weights in the graph are computed exactly and the size of the cluster C is c0 . Within the
round, vertex v only accepts a merge proposal from a neighboring blue vertex if the total size of the
cluster C, including the growth incurred by previous proposals accepted within this round, is smaller
than (1 + )c0 . This approach ensures that the weight of any merged edge is close to Wmax , and thus
lets us argue that our algorithm is (1 + )-approximate. However, using this capacitated approach
complicates the analysis of the round-complexity of our algorithm, making it more challenging to
bound the overall work and depth. Our main theoretical contribution is to show that the capacitated
approach results in a near-linear work and poly-logarithmic depth algorithm (ParHAC) that achieves
a (1 + )-approximation for any  > 0.


                                                   16
Algorithm 2 ParHAC(G = (V, E, w), )
Input: Similarity graph G,  > 0.
Ensure: (1 + )-approximate dendrogram for unweighted average-linkage HAC.
 1: Let D be initialized to the identity clustering.
 2: while |E| > 0 do
 3:     Let Wmax be the current maximum-weight edge in the graph.
 4:     Call ParHAC-C ONTRACT L AYER G, (1 + )−1 · Wmax , , D .
 5: return D


A.3   Missing Proofs

Algorithm 2 shows the layer-based ParHAC algorithm. Next, we present the missing proofs for the
work-depth and approximation analysis of the algorithm.
Lemma A.1. Assuming that the aspect-ratio of the graph, A = O(poly(n)), the number of layer-
contraction phases is O(log n).

Proof. Since the unweighted average-linkage function is reducible, the largest weight can only
decrease over the course of the algorithm. Furthermore, the smallest weight that the algorithm can
encounter using the unweighted average-linkage function is proportional to O(Wmin /n2 ). Thus the
weight range that the algorithm runs over is Wmax /(Wmin /n2 ) = O(poly(n)), and only O(log n)
layers are required to represent every weight in this weight range.

Lemma 2.1. Consider an arbitrary blue vertex b within an inner round. Within this round either (a)
a constant factor of edges incident to b are deleted, or (b) with constant probability b is merged into
one of its red neighbors.

Proof. Fix the random priority πb for each b ∈ B. We show that the lemma follows for any set of
distinct priorities, not necessarily random ones. It is easy to see that our algorithm is equivalent to
processing the blue vertices in the order of their priorities and deciding for each of them whether it
merges to a red neighbor. We say that a red vertex is saturated if its size has increased by more than
(1 + ) factor since the beginning of the outer round. Note that each saturated red vertex is removed
at the end of the inner iteration. Now, consider a blue vertex b. If more than half of red neighbors of b
are saturated, we are in case (a). Otherwise, with constant probability b chooses a non-saturated red
neighbor and can merge with it.

Lemma A.2. There are at most O(log n) inner rounds within each outer round with high probability.

Proof. Fix a blue vertex b. There can be at most O(log n) inner rounds when the vertex satisfies case
(a) of Lemma 2.1, and at most O(log n) times (with high probability) when it satisfies case (b). After
that, the vertex is either merged into its red neighbor or becomes isolated. In both cases, all incident
edges are removed.

Lemma 2.2. The number of outer rounds in a call to Algorithm 1 is O(log n) with high probability.

Proof. Consider the while loop in Line 6. We first prove the following claim: for each edge e of the
graph Gc at the beginning of the loop, either (a) the endpoints of e are merged together, or (b) the
weight of e drops below TL , or (c) an endpoint of e increases its size by a factor of (1 + ).
To prove this fact, we observe that when the loop terminates, all edges of Gc have been removed.
Clearly, an edge can be removed when its endpoints are merged together or when its weight drops
below TL , which corresponds to cases (a) and (b). There are two more ways of removing an edge.
First, an edge can be removed on Line 16 when its red endpoint grows by a factor of (1 + ), which
leads to case (c). Second, the edge can be removed when it connects two red vertices. This can only
happen as a result of a blue vertex merging into a red vertex. However, since for each edge in Gc the
red endpoint has size not smaller than the blue one, whenever a blue vertex merges into a red one, the
size of its cluster doubles. This finishes the proof of the claim.


                                                   17
From this claim, we immediately conclude that for a fixed layer, any edge e of G can participate in at
most O(log n) inner rounds, as each endpoint of e can increase its size at most O(log n) times. Since
within an outer round, e is included in Gc with constant probability, we conclude there can be at most
O(log n) outer rounds with high probability.

Lemma A.3. Each outer round can be implemented in O(m log n + n log2 n) expected work and
O(log2 n) depth with high probability.

Proof. Computing Gc (Line 5) and updating G and Gc within (Line 13) can be done in O(m) work
and O(log n) depth using standard parallel primitives such as prefix-sum and filter [15]. Using a
parallel comparison sort, Line 9 costs O(n log n) work and O(log n) depth [15]. The remaining steps
can be implemented in O(n) work and O(log n) depth using standard parallel primitives. Combining
the work-depth analysis with the fact that there are O(log n) inner rounds whp by Lemma A.2
completes the proof.

The work-and depth component of Theorem 2.3 follows immediately from Lemma A.3, and due to
the fact that there are O(log n) outer rounds (Lemma 2.2), and O(log n) layers overall (Lemma A.1).
We prove the final part of Theorem 2.3 by showing that ParHAC is a good approximation to sequential
average-linkage HAC.
Theorem A.4. ParHAC is an (1 + )-approximate average-linkage HAC algorithm.

Proof. Let 1 + δ be the approximation parameter used internally in the algorithm, which we will set
shortly as a function of . Consider the merges performed within an inner round in the algorithm. In
the algorithm these merges only occur between blue vertices and their red neighbors that they are
connected to with an edge with weight at least TL (the lower layer-threshold). At the start of a layer-
contraction phase the maximum similarity in the graph is Wmax and we have by construction that
(1 + δ)−1 Wmax ≤ TL . Furthermore, since the average-linkage function is reducible the maximum
similarity in the graph throughout the rest of this layer-contraction phase is always upper-bounded by
Wmax .
Consider the merges done within one inner round of the algorithm. We know that for each red vertex
r that participates in merges in this inner round, its cluster size never exceeds (1 + δ)SI (r) where
SI (r) is the cluster-size of r at the start of the outer round. Furthermore, since we maintain the exact
weights of all edges in both G and Gc after every inner round finishes (in Line 13), we know that
the weight of each (bi , r) edge for each blue vertex bi merging into r in this round is at least TL .
Therefore, the smallest value this weight can attain in a merge is TL /(1 + δ), which is lower-bounded
by (1 + δ)−2 Wmax . Therefore, our approach yields                  −2
                                                         √a (1 + δ) -approximate algorithm. Now, for
 ≤ 1 we set δ = /3, and for  > 1, we set δ = /3. Thus, we obtain an (1 + )-approximate
algorithm for average-linkage HAC for any  > 0.

B     Parallel Hardness of Graph-Based HAC
We show hardness results for the graph-based HAC problem under two fundamental linkage measures.

B.1    Hardness for Graph-Based HAC using Weighted Average-Linkage

We start by presenting our lower bound for weighted average-linkage measure as our lower bound
for average-linkage builds on it. The problem is in P, and so we show P-hardness to show the
P-completeness result. We do this by providing an NC reduction from the P-complete monotone
circuit-value problem (monotone CVP).
In monotone CVP, we are given circuit consisting of gates, that has n input variables x1 , . . . , xn ,
along with an assignment of truth values to each of the initial variables. The literals xi and x̄i appear
as initial truth-values set based on the truth-value of xi . The circuit is monotone, so the gates consist
of only AND and OR gates.
Since the topological ordering of a DAG can be computed in NC, we can assume that the circuit
consists of t gates g1 , . . . , gt where each of g1 , . . . , g2n corresponds to one input literal or its negation,
and for i > 2n, gate gi has exactly two inputs, which are gates with indices less than i.


                                                        18
Figure 4: This figure illustrates the gadgets used in the reduction from the monotone circuit value
problem to show that graph-based HAC using weighted average-linkage is P-complete.


Construction. The reduction builds a graph H = (V 0 , E 0 ) with 2t − 2n + 2 vertices, where
V 0 = {g1 , . . . , gt , Ctrue , Cfalse , d2n+1 , d2n+2 , . . . , dt } illustrated in Figure 4. The high-level idea is
to ensure that running graph-based HAC on H results in gates evaluating to true merging into Ctrue
and gates evaluating to false merging into Cfalse . The only role of vertices d2n+1 , d2n+2 , . . . , dt is to
prevent Ctrue and Cfalse from merging with each other until the final merge. To this end, each of the
vertices dk will have a positive-weight edge to Ctrue and a negative-weight edge to Cfalse .
Note that the construction can be easily modified not to use negative weights, since in the case of
weighted average-linkage increasing all edge weights by the same amount does not affect the course
of the algorithm.
The construction is entirely local and can thus be easily parallelized using standard parallel primitives
such as prefix-sums. The graph we define adds a gadget for each gate, which is defined using
w(i) := t − i, and a constant δ ∈ (0, 1/4).
The graph H is constructed by adding the following set of edges. For each k = 1, . . . , t:
1. If k ≤ 2n, we add an edge of weight w(0) between gk and Ctrue or Cfalse , depending of the value
   of the literal gk .
2. Assume k > 2n and gk = AND(gi , gj ). We add the following edges:
   {(gk , Ctrue , w(k) − 2δ), (gk , Cfalse , w(k) − δ), (gk , gi , w(k)), (gk , gj , w(k)), (dk , Ctrue , w(k) −
   3δ), (dk , Cfalse , −2t)}.
3. Assume k > 2n and gk = AND(gi , gj ). We add the following edges:
   {(gk , Ctrue , w(k) − δ), (gk , Cfalse , w(k) − 2δ), (gk , gi , w(k)), (gk , gj , w(k)), (dk , Ctrue , w(k) −
   3δ), (dk , Cfalse , −2t)}.
Finally, we add an edge between Ctrue and Cfalse of weight −t. An illustration of the resulting
gadgets built from gk for AND and OR gates is shown in Figure 4. We first show that the gadgets are
processed in the order of their indices.
Lemma B.1. Consider running the graph-based HAC algorithm with weighted average-linkage on
H. For any k ≥ 2n, the algorithm begins by merging gates g1 , . . . , gk and d2n+1 , . . . , dk into Ctrue
or Cfalse , before merging any gates with indices larger than k. Moreover, once all gates of indices up
to k have been merged, the weight of the edge between Ctrue and Cfalse is at most −t.

Proof. We prove the claim by induction on k. To show the base case, we need to show that the
algorithm begins by merging the gates corresponding to literals to either Ctrue or Cfalse .
Observe that w(0), the edge weight used for connecting literals to Ctrue or Cfalse , is the largest edge
weight in the graph. Moreover, each merge of a literal gate reduces by 1 the number of edges of
weight at least w(0), so the algorithm indeed begins by merging gates g1 , . . . , g2n into Ctrue or Cfalse .
Consider now k > 2n and assume the algorithm has merged g1 , . . . , gk−1 and d2n+1 , . . . , dk−1 into
Ctrue and Cfalse . Hence, the remaining set of vertices are gk , . . . , gt , dk , . . . , dt , Ctrue , and Cfalse .
Let us look at the set of edge weights in the remaining graph.


                                                         19
       • For any dj , where j ≥ k, clearly the incident edges still have weights w(j) − 3δ and −4t.
       • For any gj , where j ≥ k, by induction hypothesis, gj has not yet participated in any merges.
         In the original graph the edges incident to gj connect gj to
           1. its inputs (weight w(j)),
           2. Ctrue and Cfalse (weight at least w(j) − 2δ),
           3. gates with indices larger than j (of weight at most w(j) − 1).
         By the induction hypothesis, the only change that may have happened to the set of edges
         incident to gj is that edges of type 1 above may have been merged with edges of type 2.
         Still, gj has an incident edge of weight belonging to (w(j) − 2δ, w(j)].
       • In addition, there is an edge between Ctrue and Cfalse of negative weight.

From the definition of w(·) it follows that the only edges of weight more than w(k) − 1 are incident
to gk and dk . Moreover, the highest weight edge is incident to gk . Since both inputs to gk have been
already merged into Ctrue or Cfalse , it follows that gk merges into one of them as well. After that, dk
merges into Ctrue .
Before these two steps, the edge between Ctrue and Cfalse had weight of at most −t. Since (w(k) −
t)/2 ≤ 0, after the first merge, the weight between Ctrue and Cfalse remains negative. Denote it by
x. After dk is merged into Ctrue , the weight of the edge between Ctrue and Cfalse is (x − 2t)/2 ≤
−2t/2 = −t.
Lemma B.2. Consider running graph-based HAC algorithm with weighted average-linkage on H
until no edges of nonnegative weight remain. Then, the algorithm produces exactly two clusters,
where one of them contains Ctrue and vertices corresponding to gates that evaluate to true and the
other one contains Cfalse and all vertices corresponding to gates that evaluate to false.

Proof. We show that gates g1 , . . . , gk are correctly merged into Ctrue or Cfalse using an induction on
k. For k ≤ 2n this follows directly from the construction and Lemma B.1.
Now assume k > 2n. We use Lemma B.1 and look at the point where gk is merged for the first time.
At this point, we know that the inputs to gk have been (correctly) merged into Ctrue or Cfalse .
The proof is a case-by-case analysis, depending on the gate type and the values of the inputs.
For example, if gk = AND(gi , gj ), and gi = gj = true, we have that the updated weight of
(gk , Ctrue ) = 1 − δ/2, and the weight of (gk , Cfalse ) = 1 − δ, and therefore gk is correctly merged
with Ctrue . On the other hand, if one or both of {gi , gj } = false, then the updated weight of
(gk , Ctrue ) ≤ 1 − δ, and the weight of (gk , Cfalse ) ≥ 1 − δ/2, ensuring that gk is correctly merged
with Cfalse . It is easy to check the other cases similarly.
It follows from Lemma B.1 that the clusters containing Ctrue and Cfalse are never merged with each
other. The Lemma follows.

This immediately implies the following.
Theorem B.3. Graph-based HAC using weighted average-linkage is P-complete.

B.2    Hardness for Graph-Based HAC using Average-Linkage

Our reduction for average-linkage is similar to the reduction for weighted average-linkage, but
requires additional steps to handle how average-linkage adjusts the weight of an edge between two
clusters based on their respective sizes. 8
As before, our reduction starts from the monotone CVP problem, and the idea is to have HAC simulate
the execution of the circuit so that gates evaluating to true (false) are merged to Ctrue (Cfalse ).
One of the main problems to deal with is that the weight of an edge between two clusters U and V in
average-linkage is equal to the sum of the weights crossing the cut from U to V normalized by the
   8
   Note that average-linkage is not a special case of weighted average-linkage measure. See the start of
Appendix A for the definitions.


                                                   20
Figure 5: Gadgets used in the reduction from the monotone circuit value problem to show that
graph-based HAC using average-linkage is P-complete.


product |U | · |V |. The challenge is that we do not know (without running the algorithm) what the
size of Ctrue or Cfalse will be at some intermediate step in the algorithm, since these sizes depend on
the number of gates that evaluate to true and false respectively.
To fix this problem, we add two vertices per gate corresponding to gi and ḡi and ensure that if gi
merges to Ctrue , ḡi merges to Cfalse . In addition, we need to assure that Ctrue and Cfalse do not merge
with each other. To this end, we ensure that the graph-based HAC algorithm starts by increasing the
clusters of both Ctrue and Cfalse to a large size, which makes them harder to merge with each other.

Construction. As in the case of weighted average linkage, we can assume that the circuit consists of
t gates g1 , . . . , gt where each of g1 , . . . , g2n corresponds to one input literal or its negation, and for
i > 2n, gate gi has exactly two inputs, which are gates with indices less than i. The reduction builds
a graph H = (V 0 , E 0 ), which initially has two special vertices, Ctrue and Cfalse . In the description we
use w(k) := 4t − 2k and  = 1/100.
First, we add (1/ − 3) · t dummy vertices, and connect half of them to Ctrue and half to Cfalse using
edges of weight t3 .
Then, we add 2n vertices corresponding to the literals, and connect each of them to either Ctrue or
Cfalse , depending on the literal value, also with an edge of weight t3 . These high weight edges ensure
that the graph-based HAC algorithm proceeds by merging the dummy vertices and literal vertices to
Ctrue or Cfalse .
Finally, we add 2(t − 2n) vertices corresponding to the gates. For a fixed i (2n < i ≤ t), we add two
vertices gi and ḡi corresponding to gate gi in the circuit.
1. For gk = AND(gi , gj ), create a vertex gk with edges:
   {(gk , Ctrue , w(k)), (gk , Cfalse , w(k) + (3/2))} and
   {(gk , gi , ), (gk , gj , ))}.
2. For ḡk = OR(ḡi , ḡj ), create a vertex ḡk with edges:
   {(ḡk , Ctrue , w(k) − 1 + (3/2)), (ḡk , Cfalse , w(k) − 1)} and
   {(ḡk , ḡi , ), (ḡk , ḡj , )}.
The construction for gk = AND(gi , gj ) swaps gk and g¯k in the descriptions above. Induction over
the merge steps, performing case analysis on the truth values of the inputs to each gate, similar to our
proof for weighted average-linkage yields the following theorem.
Theorem B.4. Graph-based HAC using average-linkage is P-complete.


Proof. Let a merge step of the graph-based HAC algorithm be two consecutive merges that it
performs, and call the internal merges sub-merges. The proof shows by induction on the merge steps
that the next merge merges the vertices g and ḡ, and that the merge correctly simulates the circuit
logic for g and ḡ.
Suppose in the k-th step that some vertex gk0 , with k 0 > k is merged instead of gk (the proof is
essentially identical for ḡk ). We consider two cases. In the first case, suppose the merge is between
gk0 and either Ctrue or Cfalse . Denote the weights of Ctrue and Cfalse by r. The weight of the edge


                                                      21
between gk and Ctrue or Cfalse is at least w(k)/r and the weight of any edge incident to gk0 is at most
(w(k 0 ) + (5/2))/r < w(k)/r, a contradiction.
In the second case, suppose the merge is between gk0 and one of its inputs, gj , which clearly uses an
edge of weight at most . To argue that this cannot happen, we show that the linkage similarity of gk
to both Ctrue and Cfalse is greater than . Indeed, the cluster size of both Ctrue and Cfalse is at most
1 + t(1/ − 3) + 2t < t/. Hence, the weight of an edge from gk to any of these clusters is at least
(w(k) − 1)/(t/) ≤ (w(t) − 1)/(t/) = (4t − 2t − 1)/(t/) > .
Finally, we also show that Ctrue and Cfalse do not merge with each other. Observe that the sizes of
both these clusters are at least t/(2). The total weight between them can be upper bounded by the
total weight of edges connecting Ctrue and Cfalse to the vertices representing gates, which is at most
4 · t · w(0) ≤ 16t2 . Hence, the linkage similarity is at most 16t2 /(t2 /2 ) = 162 < .
Next, we show that the gadgets correctly simulate the gates’ logic. Suppose gk = AND(gi , gj ) and
ḡk = OR(ḡi , ḡj ). Since the edges incident to gk have higher weights than edges incident to ḡk , gk
are merged first. Below, we consider the unnormalized weights, i.e., the weights before normalizing
by the product of the cluster weights (comparing unnormalized weights is sufficient since clusters
of Ctrue and Cfalse have the same size). Suppose gi = gj = false, then the weight between gk and
Ctrue is w(k), the weight to Cfalse is w(k) + (3/2) + 2 and gk is merged to Cfalse . If only one of
gi = false, then the weight between gk and Ctrue is w(k) + , the weight to Cfalse is w(k) + (3/2) + 
and gk will also be merged to Cfalse . Finally, if gi = gj = true, the weight between gk and Ctrue is
w(k) + 2, the weight to Cfalse is w(k) + (3/2) and gk is merged to Ctrue .
Note that when performing the merge for ḡk , the cluster that ḡk must not merge to has size one larger
than the cluster it should merge to. It is easy to calculate as in the example above that this imbalance
in sizes does not affect the correctness of the gadget for ḡk .



C    ParHAC Implementation

This section completes our implementation description introduced in Section C. We implemented
ParHAC in C++ using the recently developed CPAM (Compressed Parallel Augmented Maps)
framework [38], which lets users construct compressed and highly space-efficient ordered maps
and sets. We build on CPAM’s implementation of the Aspen framework [33, 38], which provides
a lossless compressed dynamic graph representation that supports efficient updates (batch edge
insertions and deletions). We also use the ParlayLib library for parallel primitives such as reduction,
prefix-sum, and sorting [13].

Geometric Layering. Instead of explicitly extracting the edges in each layer and constructing the
graph Gc in each outer round, we opted for a simpler approach which works as follows: for each
layer-contraction phase in the algorithm we first (i) compute the set of vertices that are active in
this phase, i.e., have at least one incident edge in the current layer and then (ii) repeatedly run the
capacitated random-mate steps for an inner round from Algorithm 1, recomputing the weights of all
affected edges in the graph at the end of each inner round. Our implementation modifies Algorithm 1
by removing Line 6, which effectively fuses the outer and inner rounds. After each round, we check
whether each vertex is still active, and continue within this layer until no further active vertices
remain.

Compressed Clustered Graph Representation. We observed that in practice our ParHAC algo-
rithm can perform a large number of rounds per-layer in the case where  is very small (e.g.,  = 0.01).
Although updating the entire graph on each of these rounds is theoretically-efficient (the algorithm
will only perform Õ(m + n) work), many of these rounds only merge a small number of vertices, and
leave the majority of the edges unaffected. Hence, updating the weights of all edges in each round
can be highly wasteful.
Instead, we designed an efficient compressed clustered graph representation using purely-functional
compressed trees from the CPAM framework [38]. The new data structure handles all merge
operations that affect the underlying similarity graph in work proportional to the number of merged
vertices and their incident neighbors rather than proportional to the total number of edges in the graph.


                                                  22
Importantly, using CPAM enables lossless compression for integer-keyed maps to store the cluster
adjacency information using just a few bytes per edge.9
Our data structure stores the vertices in an array, and stores the current neighbors of each vertex in a
weight-balanced compressed purely-functional tree called a PaC-tree [38]. Each vertex also stores
several extra variables that store its current cluster size, and variables that help build the dendrogram,
such as the current cluster-id of each vertex. There are two key operations that we provide in the
compressed clustered graph representation:
  (1) MultiMerge: given a sequence M of (r, b) vertex merges where r is a red vertex and b is a blue
      vertex, update the graph based on all merges in M .
  (2) Neighborhood Primitives: apply a function f (e.g., map, reduce, filter) in parallel over all
      current neighbors of a vertex.
For example, our implementation of Algorithm 1 uses a parallel map operation over the neighbors of
all blue vertices to generate a sequence of merges, which it then supplies to the MultiMerge primitive.
Additionally, in our implementation, all of the details of maintaining the dendrogram, keeping track of
the size of each cluster, and maintaining the current state of the underlying weighted similarity graph
are handled by the compressed clustered graph representation. This enables us to write high-level
code for our ParHAC implementation while handling the more low-level details about efficiently
merging vertices within the clustered graph code.

Other Parallel Graph Clustering Algorithms. Our new graph representation makes it very easy to
implement other parallel graph clustering algorithms. In particular, we developed a faithful version
of the Affinity clustering algorithm [8] and the recently proposed SCC algorithm [54] (which is
essentially a thresholded version of Affinity) using a few dozens of lines of additional code. Both
algorithms are essentially heuristics that are designed to mimic the behavior of HAC, while running
in very few rounds (an important constraint for the distributed environments these algorithms are
designed for). We note that most of the work done by these algorithms is the work required to merge
clusters in the underlying graph, and so by using the same primitives for merging graphs, we eliminate
a significant source of differences when comparing algorithms.
The Affinity clustering algorithm [8] is inspired by Borůvka’s MST algorithm [18]. In each round
of Affinity clustering, each vertex selects its heaviest incident edge, and all connected components
induced by the chosen edges are merged to form new clusters. This process continues until no further
edges remain in the graph. After computing best edges, our implementation uses a highly optimized
parallel union-find connectivity algorithm from the ConnectIt framework [34, 43] to compute a
unique vertex per Affinity tree, which is used as a ‘red’ vertex in the MultiMerge procedure, with all
other vertices in its component being ‘blue’ vertices.
The SCC algorithm [54] is closely related to the Affinity algorithm, and can be viewed as running
Affinity with different weight thresholds. Specifically, in the i-th round, the SCC algorithm runs a
round of Affinity on the graph induced by all edges with weight at least Ti where Ti is the weight
threshold on the i-th round. Given the maximum number of rounds R, and the upper threshold U and
lower threshold L, the SCC algorithm runs a sequence of R rounds where Ti = U · (L/U )R−i . As
with Affinity, if the graph becomes empty before all R iterations are run, the algorithm terminates
early. We note that our implementation is a best-effort approximation of the SCC algorithm, since
SCC was originally designed for the dissimilarity setting and there is no one-to-one mapping to the
similarity setting. We refer to our implementation of SCC as SCCsim .
We note that our initial implementations of Affinity and SCCsim were developed in the GBBS
framework for static graph processing [32, 36], and did not make use of the compressed clustered
graph representation. These initial implementations recomputed the weights of all edges in the graph
in each round. We found that our new implementations using the compressed clustered graph, which
only recompute the weights of edges incident to a merge, are between 7–11x faster across the graphs
we evaluate.



   9
     We find a 2.9x improvement in space-usage by using our CPAM-based implementation over an optimized
hashtable-based implementation of a clustered graph, while the running times of both implementations are
essentially the same.


                                                   23
D        Experimental Results

Graph Data. We list information about graphs used in our experiments in Table 1. com-DBLP
(DB) is a co-authorship network sourced from the DBLP computer science bibliography (License:
CC BY-SA). YouTube (YT) is a social-network formed by user-defined groups on the YouTube
site (License: CC BY-SA). LiveJournal (LJ) is a directed graph of the social network (License:
CC BY-SA). com-Orkut (OK) is an undirected graph of the Orkut social network (License: CC
BY-SA). Friendster (FS) is an undirected graph describing friendships from a gaming network
(License: CC0 1.0). All of the aforementioned graphs are sourced from the SNAP dataset [51].10
The licenses are obtained using the data licensing information at the Network Repository.11 USA-
Road (RD) is an undirected road network from the DIMACS challenge [29] (License: CC BY-
SA).12 Twitter (TW) is a directed graph of the Twitter network, where edges represent the follower
relationship [49] (License: CC BY-SA). 13 ClueWeb (CW) is a web graph from the Lemur project
at CMU [17] (the authors use a custom open-source license that “provide flexibility to scientists
and software developers”; for more details please see http://www.lemurproject.org/). 14
Hyperlink (HL) is a hyperlink graph obtained from the WebDataCommons dataset where nodes
represent web pages [53] (License: available to anyone following the Common Crawl Terms of Use:
https://commoncrawl.org/terms-of-use/). 15 We note that the large real-world graphs
                                                                                           1
that we study are not weighted, and so we set the similarity of an edge (u, v) to log(deg(u)+deg(v)) . For
the CW and HL graphs, which contain tens to hundreds of billions of edges, due to memory constraints
on the machine we use, we set the initial edge weights to 1 and use byte-codes to store the weights in
a number of bytes proportional to their size [69, 38]. We emphasize that the aggregate weights on
edges (the number of edges in the original graph that each edge between clusters represents) as the
algorithm progresses grow significantly larger, and do not simply stay fixed at 1.
We also consider graphs generated from a pointset by computing the approximate nearest neighbors
(ANN) of each point, and converting the distances to similarities. Our graph building process converts
                                                                1
distances to similarities using the formula sim(u, v) = 1+dist(u,v)  .16 It then reweights similarities
by dividing each similarity by the maximum similarity. In our implementation, we compute the
k-approximate nearest neighbors using a shared-memory parallel implementation of the Vamana
approximate nearest neighbors (ANN) algorithm [44] with parameters R = 75, L = 100, Q =
max(L, k). We note that this parameter setting yields almost perfect recall on the SIFT datasets for
the 10-nearest neighbors. More details about the quality of the Vamana algorithm can be found on
ANN-Benchmarks [6]. The datasets that we use are sourced from the sklearn.datasets package17
These datasets are originally sourced from the UCI repository 18 , which does not have a clearly
stated licensing policy. However, we note that all of the datasets we test on have been widely-used in
the machine learning literature, with datsets such as Iris being used in thousands of publications to
date. and the Glove-100 dataset from the ANN-Benchmarks collection [6]. The Glove-100 dataset is
licensed as Public Domain Dedication and License v1.0.19 We symmetrized all directed graph inputs
studied in this paper.

Experimental Setup. We ran all of our experiments on a 72-core Dell PowerEdge R930 (with
two-way hyper-threading) with 4 × 2.4GHz Intel 18-core E7-8867 v4 Xeon processors (with a
4800MHz bus and 45MB L3 cache) and 1TB of main memory. Our programs use a lightweight
parallel scheduler based on the Arora-Blumofe-Plaxton deque [5, 13]. For parallel experiments, we
use numactl -i all to balance the memory allocations across the sockets.
    10
      Sources: https://snap.stanford.edu/data/.
    11
      https://networkrepository.com/policy.php
   12
      http://www.dis.uniroma1.it/challenge9/
   13
      Source: http://law.di.unimi.it/webdata/twitter-2010/.
   14
      Source: https://law.di.unimi.it/webdata/clueweb12/.
   15
      Source: http://webdatacommons.org/hyperlinkgraph/.
   16
      We also considered other distance-to-similarity schemes, e.g., sim(u, v) = 1/(1 + logc (dist(u, v))) and
sim(u, v) = e−dist(u,v) . We observed that the first choice, with c > 1 yielded slightly better quality results for
sparse graph-based methods, but chose the scheme used in this paper for its simplicity.
   17
      For more detailed information see https://scikit-learn.org/stable/datasets.html.
   18
      https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets.php
   19
      https://nlp.stanford.edu/projects/glove/


                                                        24
Table 1: Graph inputs, including the number of vertices (n), number of directed edges (m), and the average
degree (m/n).

                 Graph Dataset          Num. Vertices              Num. Edges      Avg. Degree
                 com-DBLP (DB)                425,957             2,099,732               4.92
                 YouTube-Sym (YT)           1,138,499             5,980,886               5.25
                 USA-Road (RD)             23,947,348            57,708,624               2.40
                 LiveJournal (LJ)           4,847,571            85,702,474               17.6
                 com-Orkut (OK)             3,072,627           234,370,166               76.2
                 Twitter (TW)              41,652,231         2,405,026,092               57.7
                 Friendster (FS)           65,608,366         3,612,134,270               55.0
                 ClueWeb (CW)             978,408,098        74,744,358,622               76.3
                 Hyperlink (HL)         1,724,573,718       124,141,874,032               71.9


D.1   Quality Evaluation

Quality Metrics. To measure quality, we use the Adjusted Rand-Index (ARI) and Normalized
Mutual Information (NMI) scores, which are standard measures of the quality of a clustering with
respect to a ground-truth clustering. We also use the Dendrogram Purity measure [42], which takes
on values between [0, 1] and takes on a value of 1 if and only if the tree contains the ground truth
clustering as a tree consistent partition (i.e., each class appears as exactly the leaves of some subtree of
the tree). Given a tree T tree with leaves V , and a ground truth partition of V into C = {C1 , . . . , Cl }
classes, define the purity of a subset S ⊆ V with respect to a class Ci to be P(S, Ci ) = |S ∩ Ci |/|S|.
Then, the purity of T is
                                                l
                                        1 X             X
                          P(T ) =                                  P (lcaT (x, y), Ci )
                                     |Pairs| i=1
                                                    x,y∈Ci ,x6=y

where Pairs = {(x, y) | ∃i s.t. {x, y} ⊆ Ci } and lcaT (x, y) is the set of leaves of the least common
ancestor of x and y in T . Lastly, we also study the unsupervised Dasgupta Cost [27] measure of our
dendrograms, which is measured with respect to an underlying similarity graph G(V, E, w) and is
defined as:                            X
                                             |lcaT (u, v)| · w(u, v)
                                      (u,v)∈E


Quality Study. Table 2 shows the results of our quality study. We observe that our ParHAC0.1
algorithm achieves consistent high-quality results across all of the quality measures that we evaluate.
For the ARI measure, ParHAC0.1 is on average within 1.5% of the best ARI score for each graph
(and achieves the best score for one of the graphs). For the NMI measure, ParHAC0.1 is on average
within 1.3% of the best NMI score for each graph (and again achieves the best score for two of the
graphs). ParHAC0.1 also achieves good results for the dendrogram purity and Dasgupta cost measures.
For purity, it is on average within 1.9% of the best purity score for each graph, achieving the best
score for one of the graphs, and for the unsupervised Dasgupta cost measure it is on average within
1.03% of the smallest Dasgupta cost score for each graph. Compared with the SciPy unweighted
average-linkage which runs on the underlying pointset, ParHAC0.1 achieves 14.4% better ARI score
on average, 3.6% better NMI score on average, 4.7% better dendrogram purity on average, and 1.02%
larger Dasgupta cost on average. Lastly, we observe that out of Affinity and SCCsim , SCCsim nearly
always outperforms Affinity on all quality measures. Compared to SCCsim , ParHAC0.1 consistently
obtains better quality results, achieving 35.6% better ARI score on average, 12.1% better NMI score
on average, 6.7% better dendrogram purity on average, and 3.1% better Dasgupta cost on average.
Quality vs. k. We also show additional results for the quality of different algorithms studied in this
paper versus the value of k used in the k-NN graph construction. For clarity, the following figures are
shown at the end of the appendix.

       • Figures 15–18 show quality measures for the iris dataset.
       • Figures 19–22 show quality measures for the wine dataset.
       • Figures 23–26 show quality measures for the digits dataset.


                                                       25
     Table 2: Adjusted Rand-Index (ARI), Normalized Mutual Information (NMI), Dendrogram Purity, and Dasgupta cost of our new ParHAC implementations (columns 2–3) versus the
     RAC and SeqHAC implementations (columns 4–5), our Affinity and SCCsim implementations (columns 6–7), and the HAC implementations from SciPy (columns 8–11). Both RAC
     and SeqHACE are exact HAC algorithms, and thus compute the same dendrogram. The scores are calculated by evaluating the clustering generated by each cut of the dendrogram
     against ground-truth labels. All graph-based implementations are run over the similarity graph given by an approximate k-NN graph with k = 10. The Dasgupta cost is computed over
     the complete similarity graph generated from the all-pairs distance graph. The best quality score for each graph is in green and underlined.
                   Dataset   ParHACE     ParHAC0.1   RAC and SeqHACE        SeqHAC0.1        Affinity      SCCsim       Sci-Single    Sci-Complete      Sci-Avg       Sci-Ward
                   iris        0.892       0.911            0.873              0.873          0.599         0.786         0.715           0.642          0.759          0.731
                   wine        0.401       0.401            0.401              0.401          0.416         0.374         0.298           0.371          0.352          0.368
                   digits      0.912       0.896            0.895              0.895          0.625         0.851         0.661           0.479          0.690          0.813




         ARI
                   cancer      0.440       0.491            0.447              0.447          0.375         0.197         0.561           0.465          0.537          0.406
                   faces       0.621       0.618            0.610              0.610          0.460         0.607         0.468           0.472          0.529          0.608
                   iris        0.858       0.876            0.842              0.842          0.692         0.780         0.734           0.722          0.806          0.770
                   wine        0.409       0.409            0.394              0.394          0.426         0.400         0.410           0.442          0.428          0.428
                   digits      0.928       0.916            0.913              0.931          0.768         0.859         0.562           0.711          0.830          0.869




26
        NMI
                   cancer      0.445       0.464            0.445              0.445          0.412         0.325         0.316           0.428          0.456          0.423
                   faces       0.879       0.874            0.873              0.873          0.858         0.867         0.848           0.849          0.861          0.869
                   iris        0.931       0.943            0.920              0.920          0.764         0.884         0.843           0.791          0.869          0.850
                   wine        0.619       0.623            0.605              0.605          0.616         0.630         0.584           0.607          0.620          0.616
                   digits      0.904       0.883            0.891              0.891          0.729         0.811         0.737           0.562          0.755          0.851




        Purity
                   cancer      0.812       0.823            0.797              0.797          0.764         0.703         0.798           0.804          0.829          0.783
                   faces       0.640       0.613            0.618              0.621          0.538         0.601         0.566           0.502          0.623          0.614
                   iris        320665      320883          320665             320665         362177        322308         314445         323384          310957        311267
                   wine        29114        29093          29114              29114          29468         27095           27891          27745           27324         26983
                   digits    243841216   243166244       243840641          243837090      244130381     244983907      244836138      243726701       240476750     241239871
                   cancer      789808      751107          789808             789808         794858        952966         841428         742226          737071        752549




        Dasgupta
                   faces      4629934     4632156         4629934            4622371        4674997       4669787        4640884        4600388         4569916       4619691
Table 3: Variability in each cost measure when running ParHAC using varying values of  on the Iris dataset
with k = 10. Each entry is the standard deviation of the metric when running 100 repeated trials.

                            Epsilon      ARI       NMI     Purity   Dasgupta
                            0         2e−16     3e−16     2e−16        5e−11
                            0.01      1e−16     3e−16     2e−16        4e−16
                            0.1        0.058     0.044     0.024          633
                            1.0        0.063     0.048     0.031         1592


       • Figures 27–30 show quality measures for the faces dataset.
       • Figures 31–34 show quality measures for the cancer dataset.

There are several interesting trends that we observe across all of these results:

       • First, sparse similarity graphs, i.e. graphs constructed using very small k relative to the total
         number of data points yield high quality results. In particular, using k = 10 is almost always
         an ideal choice for all quality measures except for Dasgupta cost. For the unsupervised
         Dasgupta cost objective, we observe that the cost actually improves slightly using very dense
         (almost complete) graphs, which could be due to the fact that the Dasgupta cost measures is
         computed over the complete version of the graph.
       • Second, we observe that Affinity and SCC yield significantly more noisy results compared
         with the ParHAC results (note that Affinity and SCC are deterministic algorithms; by noise
         we are referring to the clustering quality as a function of k). It would be interesting to better
         understand why this is the case. We conjecture that this is due to overmerging within each
         round, and plan to investigate this further in future work.
       • Third, ParHAC using  = {0, 0.01, 0.1} yield similar results in terms of quality up until
         very large k. For  = 1, we see a sharp divergence and loss of quality, which suggests that
         this value of  may be impractical to use in practice. We find that our suggested choice of
          = 0.1 yields almost exact quality results for very sparse graphs (see Table 2 for the results
         with k = 10) and degrades gradually, with poor performance only once the graph becomes
         close to complete.

Variability for k = 10. As ParHAC is a randomized algorithm, the clustering results obtained by
the algorithm can vary from run to run. We studied the variability in the clustering outputs obtained
by ParHAC for different values of , and for a fixed k = 10 in the graph-building process and show
the standard deviation in Table 3. We observe that for  = 0 and very small values, e.g.,  = 0.01,
the clustering outputs are essentially identical across runs. For  = 0.1, we observe some variability
across all cost measures, but note that the difference is at most 5.8% for the ARI, NMI, and Purity
metrics, and is just 0.19% of the overall Dasgupta cost for the Dasgupta objective. We also emphasize
that the higher variability seems to be responsible for some of the best results that we observe in
Table 2, e.g., ParHAC using  = 0.1 achieves the best ARI score across all algorithms that we
evaluated. When going from  = 0.1 to  = 1, as expected, we observe that the variability increases
with increasing , as the algorithm has greater choice in which edges to merge in a given layer.

D.2   Scalability Evaluation

In this sub-section, we present additional experimental results on the scalability of our algorithms,
both on real-world graph datasets and real-world pointsets (both described earlier).
Speedup Results. In Figure 6 we show the speedup of our ParHAC implementation on the RD, LJ,
and OK graphs. On LJ and OK, our ParHAC implementation achieves 48.0x and 61.3x self-relative
speedup respectively. For the RD graph, our ParHAC implementation achieves 25.7x self-relative
speedup. The lower self-relative speedups for the RD graph are since ParHAC performs significantly
less work on RD than on the LJ graph. In particular, the time spent merging vertices in the MultiMerge
implementation is 3.8x lower than the time spent in the LJ graph, although both graphs have nearly
the same total number of vertices and edges. The reason is that the average number of neighbors per
cluster at the time of its merge is significantly lower on RD than on the other graphs.


                                                    27
              60.0                         RD                                                                                                           104         DB            TW




                                                                                                                            Running Time (in seconds)
                                           LJ                                                                                                                       YT            FS
              50.0
                                           OK                                                                                                           103         RD            CW
              40.0                                                                                                                                                  LJ            HL
Speedup

                                                                                                                                                                    OK
              30.0                                                                                                                                      102

              20.0
                                                                                                                                                        101
              10.0

                          0.0                                                                                                                           100
                                       1   2     4     8     16    32     64 72   144                                                                           107             108     109         1010    1011
                                                Number of hyper-threads                                                                                             Num. Vertices + Num. Edges (n + m)



   Figure 6: Speedups for three of our large real-world                                      Figure 7: Parallel running time of the ParHAC al-
   graphs on the y-axis versus the number of hyper-                                          gorithm in seconds on the y-axis in log-scale versus
   threads used on the x-axis.                                                               the size of each graph in terms of the total number of
                                                                                             vertices and edges on the x-axis.

                                                                                                                                               102




                                                                                              Running time in seconds (logscale)
                                                                                                                                                               ParHAC-Cluster
                                                                              = 0.01                                                                          ParHAC
     Running time (in seconds)




                                 103                                          = 0.1
                                                                             =1                                                               101
                                                                              = 10
                                                                              = 100
                                 102

                                                                                                                                               100


                                 101
                                                                                                                                    10−1

                                       1   2     4     8     16    32     64 72   144
                                                Number of hyper-threads                                                                                       103                104          105          106
                                                                                                                                                                         Number of points (logscale)


   Figure 8: Parallel running times of the ParHAC                                            Figure 9: Variability in the end-to-end running
   algorithm on the LJ graph in log-scale as a func-                                         times of ParHAC using  = 0.1 and 144 hyper-
   tion of the number of threads for varying values                                          threads on varying-size slices of the glove-100
   of the accuracy parameter, .                                                             dataset. The error lines show the 95% confi-
                                                                                             dence interval for 10 independent runs per point.
                                                                                             The running times shown for ParHAC include
                                                                                             the cost of computing approximate k-NN and
                                                                                             generating the input similarity graph. ParHAC-
                                                                                             Cluster reports just the time taken to cluster the
                                                                                             generated similarity graph.


  Scalability with Increasing Graph Sizes. Figure 7 shows the parallel running times of ParHAC
  as a function of the graph size in terms of the total number of vertices and edges in the graph. We
  observe that the running time of our algorithms grows essentially linearly as a function of the graph
  size. We noticed that although the total number of vertices and edges for the RD and LJ graphs are
  similar (LJ has 10% more total vertices and edges), the running time for the LJ graph is 33% larger.
  The reason is that the RD graph has significantly lower average-degree than the LJ graph, which
  results in much less work being performed on average when merging vertices.

  Scalability for Varying Epsilon. In the next experiment, we study the absolute performance and
  speedup achieved by our ParHAC implementation on a fixed graph, as  is varied. Figure 8 shows the
  results on the LJ graph for  ∈ {0.01, 0.1, 1, 10, 100}. We observe that larger  consistently results in
  lower running times, and that the value of  = 0.1 which we use in our quality and other scalability
  experiments requires the second highest running times. We observed similar results on our other
  graph inputs. On 144 hyper-threads using a value of  = 1 provides a 2.25x speedup, and  = 100
  yields a 5.32x speedup over the parallel running time of  = 0.1.

   Performance Variability in End-to-End Experiments. Figure 9 shows the performance variability
   of our end-to-end experiment from Section 3 (Figure 2). We observe that the performance variability
   across multiple runs is extremely small, with the exception of the first few data points, which


                                                                                        28
                                               Values on top of bars are running times (seconds)
                                                                                                                       DegWeight                       LogRandWeight




                                                                       16.6
                                           5                                                                           TriangleWeight                  UnitWeight




            Slowdown Relative to Fastest
                                                                                                                       RandWeight                      InvLogDeg




                                                                              13.6
                                                                                                                       LogDegWeight
                                           4




                                                                                                                                                       93.4
                                                                                                                            52.1
                                           3




                                                                                     8.84




                                                                                                                                                              74.7
                                                                                                                                   39.4
                                                    2.27




                                                                                                 6.63
                                                1.88
                                           2




                                                                                               5.9




                                                                                                                                                28.1
                                                                                                                                               27.1
                                                                                            4.98




                                                                                                                                                                         43.7
                                                                1.42
                                                                1.42




                                                                                                                   12.6




                                                                                                                                                                          46
                                                                                                                 11.2
                                                                                                                 10.9
                                                             1.18




                                                                                                                                           20.3
                                                                                                                10.6




                                                                                                                                                                      35.2
                                                                                                                10.2
                                                                                                                10.2
                                                            1.11




                                                                                                                                                                     32.9
                                                                                                                                          18.4
                                                           1.05




                                                                                                        3.42




                                                                                                               9.47




                                                                                                                                          18.1




                                                                                                                                                                     32.2
                                           1

                                                            DB                         YT                         RD                       LJ                        OK

Figure 10: Effect of different weight schemes on the parallel 144-thread running time of ParHAC using  = 0.1.




experience slightly more variability due to scheduling variability when running on very small datasets.
Over all slices of the dataset that we evaluate, the largest ratios between the slowest and fastest times
for a point is at most 1.31× for the time to run ParHAC, and 1.17× for the end-to-end time, and
considering only inputs with n > 30000 points, the largest ratios are 9.34× and 4.1× respectively.

Different Weight Schemes. To understand the effect of weights on the performance of ParHAC, we
generated five different versions of the RD, LJ, and OK graphs using different weighting schemes
where we set the weight of a (u, v) edge as follows:
  (1) DegWeight: w(u, v) = deg(u) + deg(v)
  (2) TriangleWeight: w(u, v) = |N (u) ∪ N (v)|
  (3) RandWeight: w(u, v) = Uniform[1, 232 ]
  (4) LogDegWeight: w(u, v) = log(deg(u) + deg(v))
  (5) LogRandWeight: w(u, v) = log(Uniform[1, 232 ])
  (6) UnitWeight: w(u, v) = 1
  (7) InvLogDeg: w(u, v) = 1/ log(deg(u) + deg(v))
Note that LogInvWeight is the default weighting scheme used when weighting our unweighted graph
inputs.
Figure 10 shows the results of the experiment We found that different weighting schemes has an
impact on the running time, but only up to a small constant factor (this is despite the very large
difference in the aspect ratios across the different weighting schemes being in some cases). Different
weight schemes, especially those based on Degree such as DegWeight and TriangleWeight require
larger overheads on power-law degree distributed graphs like YT, LJ, and OK. In contrast, on RD, all
the schemes perform essentially the same, which is due to the fact that the maximum and average-
degrees on this graph are a small constant, and since there are very few triangles incident to each
edge. Furthermore, we observe that across all graphs, even costly schemes such as DegWeight which
encourage high-degree vertices to merge with each other can be accurately solved with at most a 5x
overhead over schemes like Unit or InvLogDeg.

Comparison with Other Algorithms. Figure 3 shows the relative performance and parallel running
times of ParHAC compared with the SeqHAC and SeqHACE algorithms, and our implementations of
the RAC, Affinity, and SCCsim algorithms. We prefix the names of new implementations (where no
shared-memory parallel implementation was previously available) with Par.
We observe that our Affinity implementation is always the fastest on our graph inputs. The reason is
that on average Affinity requires just 8.7 iterations to complete on these inputs. On the other hand,
SCCsim , which runs Affinity with weight thresholding, uses all 100 iterations, and is an average of
11.5x slower than Affinity due to the cost of the additional iterations. Our results show that when
carefully implemented, Affinity is a highly scalable algorithms that can cluster graphs with billions
of edges in a matter of just tens of minutes, although unlike ParHAC and the other approximate and
exact HAC algorithms, they do not provide strong theoretical guarantees.


                                                                                                                29
                                                20000        ParHac
                                                             RAC
                                                17500




                             Number of Rounds
                                                15000

                                                12500

                                                10000

                                                 7500

                                                 5000

                                                 2500
                                                                                   x    x    x    x
                                                    0
                                                        RD   DB   LJ   OK    YT   TW   FS   CW   HL


Figure 11: Rounds required by the ParHAC (using  = 0.1) and reciprocal agglomerative clustering (RAC)
algorithms for six large real-world graphs. The ClueWeb (CW) and Hyperlink (HL) graphs are two of the largest
publicly available graphs, with 978M and 1.72B vertices, and 74B and 124B edges, respectively. We mark
experiments where RAC does not finish after 6 hours with a red x.


Compared to Affinity and SCCsim , ParHAC is an average of 14.8x slower than our Affinity imple-
mentation and 1.24x slower than our SCCsim implementation. The main reason for the relative speed
of ParHAC compared with Affinity is the much larger number of rounds required by ParHAC on our
graph inputs (see Figure 11). We note that running SCCsim with fewer rounds yields faster results, but
used 100 iterations since this setting yielded the highest quality results in our evaluation in Section 3.1.
Furthermore, for all of our graph inputs, Affinity has one (or a few) rounds where the graph shrinks by
a massive amount, suggesting the formation of giant cluster(s) through chaining, a known issue with
clustering methods based on Boruvka’s algorithm [52]. For example, the first round of Affinity on the
CW graph drops the number of edges from 74.7B to 5.31B (14x lower) and the number of vertices
from 955M to 118M. Importantly, the very first round forms a cluster containing 261M vertices. To
conclude, our results show that ParHAC achieves a good compromise between running time and
quality, as our study in Section 3.1 shows that both Affinity and SCCsim can produce sub-optimal
dendrograms compared to the greedy exact HAC baseline.
Compared with other methods that provide provable guarantees compared with HAC, ParHAC
is significantly faster. Compared with SeqHAC and SeqHACE , ParHAC obtains 45.2x and 72.7x
speedup on average respectively. Compared with RAC, ParHAC achieves an average speedup of
7.1x. Although RAC is faster than ParHAC on DB and RD, two of our small graph inputs, it seems to
require a very large number of rounds on the remaining graphs, as we show in Figure 11. In particular,
it can take a linear number of steps in the worst case [71], and, as we show in Figure 11, up to 21,081
steps on the YouTube (YT) real-world graph with just 1.1M vertices and 5.9M edges, and an even
larger number of rounds on our larger datasets, where RAC does not terminate within 6 hours. Since
each round computes the best edge for each vertex for√a total of approximately O(m) work, and the
number of rounds for our larger graphs is close to O( m) based on Figure 11, the super-linear total
work of this algorithm prevents it from achieving good scalability. Similarly, we note that ParHACE
(i.e. using  = 0) only runs within the time limit for DB, YT, and RD, and therefore it is not shown in
Figure 3. The reason is that it performs O(mn) work when  = 0, since each iteration costs O(m)
work and the number of outer-rounds is O(n).
Discussion. To the best of our knowledge, our results are the first to show that graphs with tens to
hundreds of billions of edges can be clustered in a matter of tens of minutes (using heuristic methods
like Affinity and SCCsim with fewer iterations) to hours (using SCCsim with many iterations or
methods with approximation guarantees such as ParHAC). We are not aware of other shared-memory
clustering results that work at this large scale. Our theoretically-efficient implementations can be
viewed as part of a line of work showing that theoretically-efficient shared-memory parallel graph
algorithms can scale to the largest publicly available graphs using a modest amount of resources [31–
33].

D.3   Ablation: Comparing CPAM with Hash-based Representations

When designing our implementation of ParHAC, and specifically the clustered graph representation,
we also considered other implementations of a clustered graph. Specifically, we considered other ways
of representing the out-neighborhood of a vertex (cluster). To better understand the impact of using


                                                                        30
                                Values on top of bars are running times (in seconds)                                                                                                                        4.0
                         2.00
                                                ParHac-CPAM                                                                                                                                                                     ParHac-CPAM




                                                                       19.2
                         1.75                                                                                                                                                                               3.5
                                                ParHac-HT                                                                                                                                                                       ParHac-HT 0.16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1.91                                                                   42.7          73.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                            3.0                                                                   3.97
                         1.50




                                                                                                                                                                                     Relative Space Usage
  Relative Space Usage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.49




                                                                                                                                                    1.09e+03
                                                                                                 24.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.039




                                                                                                                                     742
                                                                                                                                                                                                            2.5



                                  1.11
                         1.25




                                                  4.85




                                                                                                                32.2
                                         0.97




                                                         4.37


                                                                11.2




                                                                                                        19.4




                                                                                                                       31.5


                                                                                                                               623




                                                                                                                                              951
                         1.00                                                                                                                                                                               2.0

                         0.75                                                                                                                                                                               1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.64          0.016           0.048        0.54          1.36          14.2          24.1
                         0.50                                                                                                                                                                               1.0

                         0.25                                                                                                                                                                               0.5

                         0.00                                                                                                                                                                               0.0
                                    DB              YT            RD                                  LJ          OK            TW                FS                                                                RD            DB              YT           LJ            OK           TW             FS


  Figure 12: Relative running times of ParHAC-                                                                                                                                   Figure 13: Relative sizes of the memory represen-
  CPAM (cluster neighborhoods represented us-                                                                                                                                    tation in bytes of ParHAC-CPAM (cluster neigh-
  ing compressed purely-functional trees from                                                                                                                                    borhoods represented using compressed purely-
  the CPAM framework) and ParHAC-HT (clus-                                                                                                                                       functional trees from the CPAM framework) and
  ter neighborhoods represented using parallel                                                                                                                                   ParHAC-HT (cluster neighborhoods represented
  hashtable). The values shown on top of each bar                                                                                                                                using parallel hashtables). Weights are stored as
  are the running time in seconds using 144 hyper-                                                                                                                               uncompressed floats. The values shown on top of
  threads.                                                                                                                                                                       each bar are the space usage of each representation
                                                                                                                                                                                 in gigabytes (GiB).


                                                                                                      140                      ParHac
                                                                                                                               ParChain
                                                                              Relative Running Time




                                                                                                      120
                                                                                                      100
                                                                                                        80                                                                                   6.84e+03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                6.4e+03
                                                                                                        60                                                            1.72e+04

                                                                                                        40
                                                                                                                                                2.24e+03                                                                                                2.06e+03
                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                 1.28 2.71                 93.7                     338          93.6                                    104                    84.2
                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        EM
                                                                                                                               K



                                                                                                                                                    0M




                                                                                                                                                                            4M



                                                                                                                                                                                                            0M



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0M
                                                                                                                              00



                                                                                                                                               s-1




                                                                                                                                                                           -2



                                                                                                                                                                                        s-1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                f-1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CH
                                                                                                                         -1




                                                                                                                                                                          ife




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ni
                                                                                                                       0D



                                                                                                                                            au




                                                                                                                                                                                     au
                                                                                                                                                                     oL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -U
                                                                                                                                           -G




                                                                                                                                                                                 -G
                                                                                                                I-1




                                                                                                                                                                   e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5D
                                                                                                                                     2D




                                                                                                                                                                                5D
                                                                                                                                                                -G
                                                                                                               UC




                                                                                                                                                               3D




Figure 14: Performance of ParHAC compared with ParChain on the large low-dimensional pointset inputs
used in the ParChain paper. The running times for ParHAC include the similarity graph construction time.



CPAM to represent this weighted adjacency information, we implemented a new hashtable-based
implementation of the clustered graph object where each cluster stores its neighbors in a hashtable
(table). Our hashtable representation uses the linear-probing concurrent hashtable described by Shun
et al. [67] to represent the weights. In our implementation of a hash-based clustered graph, each
hashtable is keyed by the id of the neighbor and the value stored is the weight of the edge. We call the
CPAM-based implementation ParHAC-CPAM and the hashtable-based implementation ParHAC-HT.
To understand the impact of using CPAM, we studied the parallel running time of our algorithms
using ParHAC-CPAM and ParHAC-HT, as well as the space usage of both types of representations.
Figure 12 and Figure 13 show the relative running times and relative sizes, respectively. We find
that the two implementations achieve very similar running times across all graphs (the one notable
exception is the RD graph, which has very low average degree, and therefore results suffers some
overhead due to hashing in the hashtable-based implementation). On the other hand, the space
usage of ParHAC-CPAM is consistently much better than that of ParHAC-HT, with an average space
improvement of 2.9x.

D.4                             Comparing ParHAC with ParChain

In addition to our comparison with Fastcluster in the main text of the paper, we wanted to understand
how ParHAC compares with state-of-the-art multicore parallel metric HAC implementations. We


                                                                                                                                                                           31
selected ParChain [75], since this recent algorithm demonstrates performance improvements over
other existing parallel implementations of metric HAC.
To understand how ParHAC and ParChain compare, we ran ParHAC on a subset of the largest pointset
datasets used in the ParChain paper [75], using the same end-to-end approach described earlier (graph
building using an implementation of Vamana, followed by running ParHAC). Figure 14 shows the
results of the experiment. We find that on average, ParHAC is 39.3x faster, and up to 73x faster than
ParChain for the average-linkage measure. We note that when we tried to run ParChain on the same
high-dimensional inputs used in this paper, e.g., Glove-100, the algorithm crashed, which is likely
due to the fact that ParChain and its optimizations were designed for low-dimensional (approximately
d ≤ 16) HAC. We also ran ParChain on the UCI datasets, and found that it produced identical
dendrograms to those computed by Sklearn, FastCluster, and SciPy, confirming that ParChain is an
exact algorithm (and is implemented correctly).
The datasets used in our experiments can be found in the ParChain paper, and are also described
below for completeness:
ParChain Datasets.
              √        The GaussianDisc data set contains points inside a bounding hypergrid with
side length 5 n, where n is the total number of points. 90% of the points are equally divided among
five clusters, each with a Gaussian distribution. Each cluster√has its mean randomly sampled from the
hypergrid, a standard deviation of 1/6, and a diameter of n. The remaining points are randomly
distributed. The UniformFill data set√contains points distributed uniformly at random inside a
bounding hypergrid with side length n, where n is the total number of points. These datasets
are synthetically generated, and thus no license is applicable to the best of our knowledge. The
synthetic data sets contain 10 million points for dimensions d = 2 and d = 5. Lastly, UCI1 [3, 16] is
a 10-dimensional data set with 19020 data points.
GeoLife [76, 2] is a 3-dimensional real-world data set with 24876978 points. This dataset contains
user location data, and is extremely skewed. The data is provided as part of a Microsoft Research
project, and no license information is available online to the best of our knowledge. CHEM [39, 1] is
a 16-dimensional dataset with 4208261 points containing chemical sensor data. Similar to the other
datasets from UCI, no licensing information is available, although the project states that the dataset
has been donated to UCI by the creators of the dataset (from UCSD).




                                                 32
         1.0                                                                                                 1.0


         0.8                                                                                                 0.8


         0.6                                                                                                 0.6




                                                                                                  NMI
ARI




         0.4                                                                                                 0.4


         0.2                                             Affinity               ParHac-0.1                   0.2                                                          Affinity                ParHac-0.1
                                                         ParHac-0.0             ParHac-1.0                                                                                ParHac-0.0              ParHac-1.0
                               k = 10                    ParHac-0.01            SCC                                                             k = 10                    ParHac-0.01             SCC
         0.0                                                                                                 0.0
               21      22           23            24         25            26         27                              21           22                23         24         25            26            27
                                            k in k-NN graph                                                                                              k in k-NN graph



Figure 15: Adjusted Rand-Index (ARI) of clusterings Figure 16: Normalized Mutual Information (NMI) of
computed by ParHAC for varying  on Iris versus the clusterings computed by ParHAC for varying  on Iris
k used in similarity graph construction.            versus the k used in similarity graph construction.




         1.0
                                                                                                                                                                          Affinity                ParHac-0.1
                                                                                                             360000                                                       ParHac-0.0              ParHac-1.0
                                                                                                                                                                          ParHac-0.01             SCC
         0.8
                                                                                                             350000
                                                                                                  Dasgupta




         0.6
Purity




                                                                                                             340000
         0.4
                                                                                                             330000

         0.2                                             Affinity               ParHac-0.1
                                                         ParHac-0.0             ParHac-1.0                   320000
                               k = 10                    ParHac-0.01            SCC                                                                k = 10
         0.0
               21      22           23            24         25            26         27                                      21           22             23         24        25            26          27
                                            k in k-NN graph                                                                                                 k in k-NN graph



Figure 17: Dendrogram Purity (Purity) of clusterings Figure 18: Dasgupta Cost (Dasgupta) of clusterings
computed by ParHAC for varying  on Iris versus the computed by ParHAC for varying  on Iris versus the
k used in similarity graph construction.            k used in similarity graph construction.




         1.0                                                                                                 1.0
                                                         Affinity               ParHac-0.1                                                                                Affinity                ParHac-0.1
                                                         ParHac-0.0             ParHac-1.0                                                                                ParHac-0.0              ParHac-1.0
                                                         ParHac-0.01            SCC                                                                                       ParHac-0.01             SCC
         0.8                                                                                                 0.8


         0.6                                                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                  NMI
ARI




         0.4                                                                                                 0.4


         0.2                                                                                                 0.2

                               k = 10                                                                                                           k = 10
         0.0                                                                                                 0.0
                   1       2            3            4       5             6          7                                   1            2
               2       2           2             2       2             2          2                                   2            2                23          24        25            26          27
                                            k in k-NN graph                                                                                              k in k-NN graph



Figure 19: Adjusted Rand-Index (ARI) of clusterings Figure 20: Normalized Mutual Information (NMI)
computed by ParHAC for varying  on Wine versus the of clusterings computed by ParHAC for varying  on
k used in similarity graph construction.            Wine versus the k used in similarity graph construction.




                                                                                             33
         1.0                                                                                                           38000
                                                                       Affinity           ParHac-0.1                                                                            Affinity           ParHac-0.1
                                                                       ParHac-0.0         ParHac-1.0                                                                            ParHac-0.0         ParHac-1.0
                                                                       ParHac-0.01        SCC                                                                                   ParHac-0.01        SCC
         0.8                                                                                                           36000


                                                                                                                       34000




                                                                                                            Dasgupta
         0.6
Purity




                                                                                                                       32000
         0.4
                                                                                                                       30000
         0.2
                                                                                                                       28000
                                     k = 10
                                                                                                                                                    k = 10
         0.0
               21            22          23               24           25            26        27                                21            22          23          24        25           26      27
                                                 k in k-NN graph                                                                                             k in k-NN graph



Figure 21: Dendrogram Purity (Purity) of clusterings Figure 22: Dasgupta Cost (Dasgupta) of clusterings
computed by ParHAC for varying  on Wine versus the computed by ParHAC for varying  on Wine versus the
k used in similarity graph construction.            k used in similarity graph construction.




         1.0                                                                                                           1.0


         0.8                                                                                                           0.8


         0.6                                                                                                           0.6
                                                                                                            NMI
ARI




         0.4                                                                                                           0.4


         0.2                                     Affinity              ParHac-0.1                                      0.2                                                      Affinity           ParHac-0.1
                                                 ParHac-0.0            ParHac-1.0                                                                                               ParHac-0.0         ParHac-1.0
                            k = 10               ParHac-0.01           SCC                                                                 k = 10                               ParHac-0.01        SCC
         0.0                                                                                                           0.0
                    22                   24                    26            28           210                                         22              24                   26         28           210
                                                 k in k-NN graph                                                                                            k in k-NN graph



Figure 23: Adjusted Rand-Index (ARI) of clusterings Figure 24: Normalized Mutual Information (NMI)
computed by ParHAC for varying  on Digits versus of clusterings computed by ParHAC for varying  on
the k used in similarity graph construction.      Digits versus the k used in similarity graph construction.




         1.0                                                                                                                   ×108
                                                                                                                   2.550                                     Affinity           ParHac-0.1
                                                                                                                                                             ParHac-0.0         ParHac-1.0
         0.8                                                                                                                                                 ParHac-0.01        SCC
                                                                                                                   2.525

                                                                                                                   2.500
         0.6
                                                                                                        Dasgupta
Purity




                                                                                                                   2.475
         0.4
                                                                                                                   2.450

         0.2                                                                                                       2.425
                                                 Affinity              ParHac-0.1
                                                 ParHac-0.0            ParHac-1.0
                            k = 10               ParHac-0.01           SCC
                                                                                                                   2.400                   k = 10
         0.0
                        2                    4                     6             8            10                                           2
                    2                    2                     2             2            2                                            2               24                  26         28           210
                                                 k in k-NN graph                                                                                             k in k-NN graph



Figure 25: Dendrogram Purity (Purity) of clusterings Figure 26: Dasgupta Cost (Dasgupta) of clusterings
computed by ParHAC for varying  on Digits versus computed by ParHAC for varying  on Digits versus
the k used in similarity graph construction.      the k used in similarity graph construction.




                                                                                                       34
         1.0                                                                                                          1.0
                                                              Affinity                   ParHac-0.1
                                                              ParHac-0.0                 ParHac-1.0
                                                              ParHac-0.01                SCC
         0.8                                                                                                          0.8


         0.6                                                                                                          0.6




                                                                                                           NMI
ARI




         0.4                                                                                                          0.4


         0.2                                                                                                          0.2                                                         Affinity                ParHac-0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                  ParHac-0.0              ParHac-1.0
                               k = 10                                                                                                             k = 10                          ParHac-0.01             SCC
         0.0                                                                                                          0.0
               21      22           23        24      25       26           27           28                                  21          22            23         24         25    26           27        28
                                            k in k-NN graph                                                                                                     k in k-NN graph



Figure 27: Adjusted Rand-Index (ARI) of clusterings Figure 28: Normalized Mutual Information (NMI)
computed by ParHAC for varying  on Faces versus of clusterings computed by ParHAC for varying  on
the k used in similarity graph construction.     Faces versus the k used in similarity graph construction.




         1.0                                                                                                                 ×106
                                                              Affinity                   ParHac-0.1                   4.85
                                                              ParHac-0.0                 ParHac-1.0                                   Affinity                  ParHac-0.1
                                                              ParHac-0.01                SCC                                          ParHac-0.0                ParHac-1.0
         0.8                                                                                                          4.80            ParHac-0.01               SCC


                                                                                                                      4.75
         0.6
                                                                                                           Dasgupta
Purity




                                                                                                                      4.70
         0.4
                                                                                                                      4.65

         0.2                                                                                                          4.60

                               k = 10                                                                                 4.55                         k = 10
         0.0
                   1       2            3         4       5        6            7            8                                    1           2
               2       2            2         2       2        2            2            2                                    2           2                23      24        25        26       27        28
                                            k in k-NN graph                                                                                                     k in k-NN graph



Figure 29: Dendrogram Purity (Purity) of clusterings Figure 30: Dasgupta Cost (Dasgupta) of clusterings
computed by ParHAC for varying  on Faces versus computed by ParHAC for varying  on Faces versus
the k used in similarity graph construction.     the k used in similarity graph construction.




         1.0                                                                                                          1.0
                                                              Affinity               ParHac-0.1                                                                                   Affinity            ParHac-0.1
                                                              ParHac-0.0             ParHac-1.0                                                                                   ParHac-0.0          ParHac-1.0
                                                              ParHac-0.01            SCC -0.001                                                                                   ParHac-0.01         SCC -0.001
         0.8                                                                                                          0.8


         0.6                                                                                                          0.6
                                                                                                           NMI
ARI




         0.4                                                                                                          0.4


         0.2                                                                                                          0.2

                               k = 10                                                                                                             k = 10
         0.0                                                                                                          0.0
                       22                    24               26                    28                                                   22                      24               26                 28
                                            k in k-NN graph                                                                                                     k in k-NN graph



Figure 31: Adjusted Rand-Index (ARI) of clusterings Figure 32: Normalized Mutual Information (NMI) of
computed by ParHAC for varying  on Cancer versus clusterings computed by ParHAC for varying  on Can-
the k used in similarity graph construction.      cer versus the k used in similarity graph construction.




                                                                                                      35
         1.0                                                                               ×106
                                                                                     1.1                                    Affinity       ParHac-0.1
                                                                                                                            ParHac-0.0     ParHac-1.0
         0.8                                                                                                                ParHac-0.01    SCC -0.001

                                                                                     1.0
         0.6
                                                                          Dasgupta
Purity




                                                                                     0.9
         0.4


                                                                                     0.8
         0.2                             Affinity       ParHac-0.1
                                         ParHac-0.0     ParHac-1.0
                    k = 10               ParHac-0.01    SCC -0.001                                     k = 10
         0.0                                                                         0.7
               22             24         26            28                                         22             24         26            28
                             k in k-NN graph                                                                    k in k-NN graph



Figure 33: Dendrogram Purity (Purity) of clusterings Figure 34: Dasgupta Cost (Dasgupta) of clusterings
computed by ParHAC for varying  on Cancer versus computed by ParHAC for varying  on Cancer versus
the k used in similarity graph construction.      the k used in similarity graph construction.




                                                                     36
